BEATTY SECONDARY SCHOOL
PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION 2022
SECONDARY FOUR EXPRESS
CANDIDATE NAME
CLASS REGISTER
NUMBER
HUMANITIES 2273/02
Paper 2 History 22 August 2022
Setter: Ms Ellie Soh 1 hour 40 minutes
Additional Materials: Answer Paper
READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST
Do not open this booklet until you are told to do so.
Write your name, class and index number in the spaces provided above and on all
writing papers you use.
Answer all parts of Question 1 from Section A.
Answer one question from Section B.
You are required to start Section B on a fresh sheet of paper.
Hand in your answers for Section A and B separately.
The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question.
This document consists of 6 printed pages and 0 blank pages.
[Turn over]

-- 1 of 24 --

2
Section A: Source-Based Case Study
Question 1 is compulsory for all candidates.
Study the Background Information and the sources carefully and then answer all the
questions.
You may use any of the sources to help you answer the questions, in addition to those
sources you are told to use. In answering the questions, you should use your
knowledge of the topic to help you interpret and evaluate the sources.
1 (a) Study Source A.
What can you learn from the source about US response to the
missile threat from Cuba? Explain your answer. [5]
(b) Study Source B.
Why did the cartoonist publish the cartoon? Explain your answer. [5]
(c) Study Source C.
Are you surprised by Source C regarding Soviet’s reason for
installing missiles in Cuba? Explain your answer. [6]
(d) Study Sources D and E.
Does Source E prove that Source D is right? Explain your answer.
[6]
(e) Study all the sources.
“The US blockade of Cuba in 1962 was justified.” How far do these
sources support this view? Use the sources and your knowledge to
explain your answer. [8]

-- 2 of 24 --

3
The Cuban Missile Crisis
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Read this carefully. It may help you answer some of the questions.
The Cuban Missile Crisis of October 1962 was a dangerous confrontation between the
United States of America (USA) and the Soviet Union during the Cold War. With both
countries holding on to the world’s first nuclear weapons, USA’s President John F.
Kennedy and Soviet’s Premier Nikita Khrushchev struggled to de-escalate mounting
tensions over Cuba. By 14 October 1962, Soviet missile installations in Cuba were
sighted by American spy planes, and USA decided to respond with a naval blockade.
On 24 October 1962, Soviet ships bound for Cuba neared the line of US vessels
enforcing the blockade. Given the height of Cold War tensions, questions were raised
on Kennedy’s decision of imposing the naval blockade.
Was the US blockade of Cuba in 1962 justified?
Source A: Adapted from a report written by a U.S Marine, published in 1990.
President Kennedy chose to employ a naval “quarantine” in his initial action against
the Soviet Union in the Cuban Missile Crisis. The only difference between a
blockade and a quarantine was that a blockade was an act of war and a quarantine,
at least in name, was not. Historically, blockades had been very effective weapons
which would sooner or later bring an enemy to its knees and to which even the
United States was vulnerable. However, it is probable that without the implicit threat
of air strike or invasion, the blockade alone, while it could have prevented Soviet
ships from bringing additional missiles to Cuba, could not have forced the removal
of the missiles already present.
[Turn over]

-- 3 of 24 --

4
Source B: A cartoon published in an American newspaper on 24 October 1962.
Title of Cartoon: You’re Threatening the Peace of the World!
Source C: Adapted from Khrushchev’s autobiography, published internationally
in 2004.
Everyone agreed that America would not leave Cuba alone unless we did
something. We had an obligation to do everything in our power to protect Cuba’s
existence as a Communist country and as a working example to other countries in
Latin America. I want to make one thing absolutely clear. We had no desire to start
a war. Only a fool would think that we wanted to invade the American continent from
Cuba. Our aim was the opposite. We wanted to keep the Americans from invading
Cuba.
Nikita
Khrushchev
Offensive
Weapons for
Cuba

-- 4 of 24 --

5
Source D: Adapted from an excerpt from the radio and television address by
President Kennedy, 22 October 1962.
Within the past week, unmistakable evidence has established the fact that a series
of offensive missile sites is now in preparation on that imprisoned island. Each of
the missiles is capable of striking Washington, D.C., the Panama Canal, Cape
Canaveral, Mexico City, or any other city in the south-eastern part of the United
States, in Central America, or in the Caribbean area… To halt this offensive build
up, a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is
being initiated. All ships of any kind bound for Cuba from whatever nation or port
will, if found to contain cargoes of offensive weapons, be turned back. This
quarantine will be extended, if needed, to other types of cargo and carriers. We are
not at this time, however, denying the necessities of life as the Soviets attempted to
do in their Berlin blockade of 1948.
Source E: Adapted from a speech by the Russian Ambassador in the United
Nations General Assembly, 23 October 1962.
Yesterday, the United States Government placed the Republic of Cuba under a
virtual naval blockade, flouting the rules of international conduct and the principles
of the UN Charter. The United States has granted itself the right to attack the ships
of other states on the high seas, which is nothing less than undisguised piracy…
The allegation that the Soviet Union has set up offensive weapons in Cuba were
false. The Soviet delegation hereby officially confirms the statements already made
about this allegation and reiterates that the Soviet government has never sent and
is not currently sending offensive weapons of any kind to Cuba.
[Turn over]

-- 5 of 24 --

6
Section B: Structured-Essay Questions
Answer one question.
2 This question is on World War II in Asia-Pacific.
(a) Explain why Japan attacked Pearl Harbour in December 1941. [8]
(b) ‘Allied victory in the war in Asia-Pacific was mainly due to the
weaknesses of Japan.’ How far do you agree with this statement?
Explain your answer.
[12]
3 This question is on the Cold War.
(a) Explain why the Soviet Union and the USA were unable to agree
during the wartime conferences. [8]
(b) ‘The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 was mainly due to
Gorbachev’s policies.’ How far do you agree with this statement?
Explain your answer. [12]
--End of Paper--
Copyright Acknowledgement
Source A https://www.usmcu.edu/Portals/218/When%20The%20Russians%20Blinked-
%20The%20U_S_%20Maritime%20Response%20To%20The%20Cuban%20Missile%20Crisis.pdf
Source B https://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/2016680843/
Source C Memoirs of Nikita Khrushchev
Source D https://www.mtholyoke.edu/acad/intrel/kencuba.htm
Source E https://alphahistory.com/coldwar/cuban-missile-debate-un-1962/

-- 6 of 24 --

7
SEC 4 EXPRESS
PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION 2022 [HISTORY]
SUGGESTED LORMS
Section A: Source-Based Case Study
1a. Study Source A. What can you learn from the source about US response to the
missile threat from Cuba? Explain your answer. [5]
- Target Skill: Inference
Level Descriptor Marks
L1 Copies or describes the source with no inference made
e.g. I can learn from the source that President Kennedy chose to
employ a naval “quarantine” in his initial action against the Soviet
Union in the Cuban Missile Crisis.
1
L2 Valid interpretation, but not the main message
Award 2m for sub-message, unsupported; Award 3m for sub-
message, supported.
e.g. I can learn from the source that the US response was in
the form of the naval blockade. This can be seen from “President
Kennedy chose to employ a naval “quarantine” in his initial action
against the Soviet Union in the Cuban Missile Crisis.” This meant
that USA had decided that the naval blockade was a suitable
response to the missiles which they had discovered in Cuba.
2 – 3
L3 Message - supported by source content
Award the higher mark in the level for more developed answers.
e.g. I can learn from the source that USA’s response towards
the missiles in Cuba was calculated and measured as they did
not just impose a naval blockade on Cuba, but also termed it
as ‘quarantine’. This can be seen from “President Kennedy chose
to employ a naval “quarantine” in his initial action against the Soviet
Union in the Cuban Missile Crisis” and “The only difference between
a blockade and a quarantine was that a blockade was an act of war
and a quarantine, at least in name, was not.” This meant that USA
knew that a naval blockade was necessary to stop USSR from
sending more missiles into Cuba, but was careful not to come
across as aggressive in case they were perceived to be initiating a
war.
OR
e.g. I can learn from the source that USA’s response was that
while they had imposed the naval blockade, they knew that it
may not be effective to stop the threat from USSR and Cuba.
4 – 5

-- 7 of 24 --

8
This can be seen from “However, it is probable that without the
implicit threat of air strike or invasion, the blockade alone, while it
could have prevented Soviet ships from bringing additional missiles
to Cuba, could not have forced the removal of the missiles already
present.” This means that USA was aware that the blockade would
not remove any existing missiles, which could still pose a threat to
their national security.

-- 8 of 24 --

9
1b. Study Source B. Why did the cartoonist publish this cartoon? Explain your answer.
[5]
- Target Skill: Inference with Purpose
Level Descriptor Marks
L1 Describes/Copies/Misinterpretation
e.g. The cartoonist published this cartoon to show that USSR
wanted to bring in offensive weapons to Cuba.
1
L2 Valid interpretation, but not the main message
e.g. The cartoonist wanted to show that USSR was
aggressive towards USA. This can be seen from the cartoon
showing Khrushchev trying to enter Cuba with offensive
weapons. This means that USA had imposed the blockade to
defend themselves against USSR as they had felt threatened by
the offensive weapons.
2
L3 Identifies main message, supported
e.g. The cartoonist drew this cartoon to show that US
blockade of Cuba was not going to be effective against
USSR’s aggression. This can be seen from the cartoon showing
Khrushchev trying to enter Cuba with offensive weapons, only to
be blocked by the blockade around Cuba, which was merely a
piece of document rolled up in a scroll. This means that USSR
had been aggressive towards USA by bringing weapons into
Cuba, threatening USA’s security. Yet, USA only responded with
a paper policy of the blockade, showing that USA had not adopted
a response that was strong enough to counter the offensive
missiles that Khrushchev was trying to bring into Cuba.
3 – 4
L4 Identifies main message AND purpose
e.g. The cartoonist drew the cartoon to criticise the American
government that that US blockade of Cuba was not going to
be effective against USSR’s aggression. This can be seen
from the cartoon showing Khrushchev trying to enter Cuba with
offensive weapons, only to be blocked by the blockade around
Cuba, which was merely a piece of document rolled up in a scroll.
This means that USSR had been aggressive towards USA by
bringing weapons into Cuba, threatening USA’s security. Yet,
USA only responded with a paper policy of the blockade, showing
that USA had not adopted a response that was strong enough to
counter the offensive missiles that Khrushchev was trying to bring
into Cuba. The cartoonist hopes that the US government would
change their policy and adopt a response that would be more
effective against Soviet aggression.
5

-- 9 of 24 --

10
1c. Are you surprised by Source C regarding Soviet’s reason for installing missiles in
Cuba? Explain your answer. [5]
- Target Skill: Surprise
Level Descriptor Marks
L1 Answers Yes/No without element of surprise
e.g. I am not surprised by Source C because it says that America
would not leave Cuba alone unless USSR did something.
1
L2 Answers No, based on provenance explained
e.g. I am not surprised by Source C because it was written by
Khrushchev, the Premier of Soviet Union. It was expected of the
leader of the Soviet Union to find that their actions were merely to
defend themselves and their ally against the Americans, especially
during Cold War when tensions between USA and USSR were
running high.
2
L3 Answers Yes or No, based on source content, supported
Award the higher mark in the level for more developed answers.
e.g. I am not surprised by Source C because it is expected that
Khrushchev, the Premier of Soviet Union, to claim that USSR
was merely being defensive and playing the role of a protector
of Cuba when it came to the Cuban Missile Crisis. This can be
seen from “We wanted to keep the Americans from invading Cuba.”
This means that USA had been antagonising Cuba, causing
tensions between the two nations and USSR had deemed it
necessary that they protect their ally from any impending threats.
3-4
L4 L3 + Answers Yes or No, based on cross reference to other
source or contextual knowledge, supported
Award the higher mark in the level for more developed answers.
e.g. L3 + I am surprised by Source C because Source D challenges
it. Source D says that USSR had in fact antagonised the situation
by installing missiles that posed a threat to USA’s security. This can
be seen from “Each of the missiles is capable of striking
Washington, D.C., the Panama Canal, Cape Canaveral, Mexico
City, or any other city in the south-eastern part of the United States,
in Central America, or in the Caribbean area…” This means that the
missiles installed in Cuba could have easily struck any city within
USA, and they were threatened by their presence. In the eyes of
President Kennedy, USSR was being aggressive, not defensive.
Since Source D disagreed with Source C, I am surprised by Source
C.
OR
4-5

-- 10 of 24 --

11
e.g. L3 + I am not surprised by Source C because my contextual
knowledge supports it. USA had indeed been intervening with
Cuba’s matters since the early 19th century, using the Monroe
Doctrine as a reason for their intervention. Despite growing
resentment among the Cubans, they have never been aggressive
towards USA. Yet, after the Cuban Revolution in 1959, USA had
increasingly been hostile towards Cuba through industrial
sabotage, like reducing the Cuban Sugar Quota, and even went on
to invade the Bay of Pigs and organised Operation Mongoose, all
with the aim of removing Castro from power. These aggressive and
hostile actions was understandably unsettling for Cuba and hence
they became allies with USSR to protect their own national security,
which USSR agreed and intended to follow through. Since my
contextual knowledge supports Source C, I am not surprised by
Source C.
L5 L3 + Answers based on critical analysis of provenance and
purpose
I am not surprised by Source C because it was expected of
Khrushchev to justify his actions during the Cuban Missile Crisis in
his autobiography. By the end of the Crisis, Khrushchev’s reputation
had been damaged, especially among communist hardliners. As
the leader of the Communist nations within the Communist bloc,
Khrushchev had seen the need to help Cuba as one of their
communist allies. The purpose of the extract in his autobiography
was to justify his actions to the readers that he had no choice but to
install the missiles in Cuba to defend USSR and its allies. This was
with the purpose to redeem his reputation as a Soviet leader.
6

-- 11 of 24 --

12
1d. Study Sources D and E. Does Source E prove that Source D is right? Explain your
answer. [6]
- Target Skill: Comparison + Reliability
Level Descriptor Marks
L1 Answers based on provenance or based on unexplained
assertions
e.g. Source E does not prove what Source D says because Source
E was made by a Russian ambassador.
1
L2 Reliable/ not reliable based on agreement/ disagreement of
Sources D and E (content)
Award the higher mark in the level for more fully developed
answers.
e.g. Source E does not prove that Source D is right because
Source E challenges Source D. Source E says that the use of the
blockade during the crisis was not justified because USSR had no
aggressive intentions towards USA. This can be seen from “The
Soviet delegation hereby officially confirms the statements already
made by the Soviet Union regarding this statement, to the effect
that the Soviet government has never sent and is not now sending
offensive weapons of any kind to Cuba.” This means that USSR
never initiated any form of aggression to warrant a blockade around
Cuba. However, Source D claims that the use of the blockade in
1962 was justified because USSR had been antagonising them by
installing missiles capable of striking US states. This can be seen
from “Each of the missiles is capable of striking Washington, D.C.,
the Panama Canal, Cape Canaveral, Mexico City, or any other city
in the south-eastern part of the United States, in Central America,
or in the Caribbean area…” This means that USA felt threatened by
the presence of missiles and hence were merely taking action to
protect themselves from further threats from USSR and Cuba,
making their decision of the naval blockade a justified one. Since
Source E challenges Source D, it does not prove that Source D is
right.
2 – 3
L3 L2 + Proves / Does not prove based on cross-reference to
contextual knowledge or other sources
e.g. L2 + However, Source E is not a reliable source in proving
that Source D is right as it is challenged by Source B. Source B
shows that USSR had been aggressive towards USA as it in fact
had been attempting to bring offensive weapons into Cuba. Source
B also goes on further to prove that the offensive weapons were
only stopped by the US blockade of Cuba. This means that USA
was defending themselves against Soviet threats to their national
security, further supporting Source D. Since Source B challenges
4

-- 12 of 24 --

13
Source E, Source E is not a reliable source, thus unable to prove
that Source D is right.
(cross reference to Source C to support Soviet non-aggression, and
therefore shows Source E reliable proving that Source D is wrong).
OR
e.g. L2 + Source E is not a reliable source in proving that
Source D is right as it is challenged by my contextual
knowledge. While the Russian ambassador claims that USSR had
not sent any offensive weapons into Cuba and had no intentions of
aggression towards USA, U-2 spy planes had indeed captured
satellite photos of missile launch sites present in Cuba since 16
October 1962, proving USA’s concerns about their security
mentioned in Source D. Since my contextual knowledge challenges
Source E, Source E is not reliable in proving that Source D is right.
L4 Reliable/ not reliable based on developed evaluation of both
Sources D and E.
Award 5m based on evaluation of Source E only.
e.g. L2+ Source E is also a not reliable source in proving that Source
D is right as the source was made with an ulterior motive in mind.
The Russian ambassador wanted to convince the members of
United Nations that the use of blockade in Cuba during the crisis
was not justified because they had not initiated any form of
aggression towards USA. The Russian ambassador hoped that by
doing so, United Nations would be able to stop USA and pressure
them into ending the blockade around Cuba. Since Source E was
made with an ulterior motive in mind, it was not reliable in proving
what Source D says about the use of the blockade during the crisis
in 1962.
However, Source D itself is not reliable because it is a statement
made by President Kennedy, declaring the naval blockade on Cuba
to the American citizens. This is a political move that undoubtedly
has the agenda of convincing the citizens of America that the
blockade was needed in order to ensure the safety and security of
US states and citizens, protecting them from the threat of the
missiles installed in Cuba by a communist superpower. This is done
so that he would be able to gain the support of his people in the
wake of the devastating Bay of Pigs invasion that left the citizens of
America unhappy with Kennedy’s regime. Since Kennedy had an
ulterior motive in making the speech, this makes Source D
unreliable in itself. Hence Source E cannot prove that Source D is
right.
5 – 6

-- 13 of 24 --

14
1e. Study all the sources. “The US blockade of Cuba in 1962 was justified.” How far
do these sources support this view? Use the sources and your knowledge to explain
your answer. [8]
- Target Skill: Assertion/ Evaluation
Level Descriptor Marks
L1 Writes about the hypothesis, no valid source use
e.g. Sources A and D supports the assertion while Sources B, C
and E do not.
1
L2 Yes OR No, supported by valid source use
Award 2 marks for one Yes or No supported by valid source use,
and an additional mark for each subsequent valid source use up to
a maximum of 4 marks.
2 – 4
L3 Yes AND No, supported by valid source use
Award 5 marks for one Yes and No supported by valid source use,
and an additional mark for each subsequent valid source use up to
a maximum of 7 marks.
e.g. Source A supports the view that the US blockade of Cuba
in 1962 was justified because USA was defending themselves
from security threats initiated by the USSR close to US soil.
This can be seen from “it is probable that without the implicit threat
of air strike or invasion, the blockade alone, while it could have
prevented Soviet ships from bringing additional missiles to Cuba,
could not have forced the removal of the missiles already present.”
This meant that USSR had installed missiles in Cuba and USA felt
threatened by it, thereby justifying the fact that they needed to
impose a blockade to defend themselves from any further potential
threats.
e.g. Source D supports the view that the US blockade of Cuba
in 1962 was justified because USA was simply defending its
national security when they decided upon the blockade. This
can be seen from “Each of the missiles is capable of striking
Washington, D.C., the Panama Canal, Cape Canaveral, Mexico
City, or any other city in the south-eastern part of the United States,
in Central America, or in the Caribbean area…” This means that
USA was clearly threatened by missiles placed so close to them
that they could strike any cities at the moment, thus imposing the
blockade was a strategy that they had to adopt to defend
themselves. Hence, Source D supports the view that US blockade
of Cuba in 1962 was justified.
AND
5 – 7

-- 14 of 24 --

15
e.g. Source B does not support the view that the US blockade
of Cuba in 1962 was justified because the response employed
by USA was ineffective against USSR’s aggression. This can
be seen from the cartoon showing Khrushchev trying to enter Cuba
with offensive weapons, yet was only met with a document rolled
up, signifying the US blockade. This means that USSR had been
aggressive towards USA by bringing weapons into Cuba,
threatening USA’s security. Yet, USA only responded with a paper
policy of the blockade, showing that USA had not adopted a
response that was strong enough to counter the offensive missiles
that Khrushchev was trying to bring into Cuba, thus showing that
the US blockade in Cuba in 1962 was not justified.
e.g. Source C does not support the view that the US blockade
of Cuba in 1962 was justified because USA had been
aggressive towards Cuba even when USSR and Cuba clearly
had “no desire to start a war”. This can also be seen from “Only
a fool would think that we wanted to invade the American continent
from Cuba.” This means that USSR saw no benefit at all to attack
USA, which gave USA no reason to impose a naval blockade on
Cuba at all. Hence, Source C does not support the view that the US
blockade of Cuba was justified.
e.g. Source E does not support the view that the US blockade
of Cuba in 1962 was justified because USSR had no aggressive
intentions towards USA, thereby giving USA no reason for the
blockade. This can be seen from “The allegation that the Soviet
Union has set up offensive weapons in Cuba were false” This
means that USSR never initiated any form of aggression, unlike
what USA had been accusing them of and hence, USA had no
reason to impose a blockade around Cuba.
L4 Consider the extent to which the sources support or do not
support the statement by studying the source in relation to its
reliability, sufficiency etc
Award a bonus of up to 2 marks (+1/+1) for use of contextual
knowledge to question a source in relation to its reliability,
sufficiency etc. The total mark for the question must not exceed 8
marks.
e.g. However, Source C is a reliable source as it is mentioned that
Khrushchev’s justification of the installation of missiles in Cuba is
defensive in nature. Based on my contextual knowledge, USSR’s
motivation in installing missiles in Cuba had been in response to
Cuba’s calls for help since the Bay of Pigs invasion in April 1961.
Furthermore, USSR had felt threatened with the placement of the
Jupiter missiles by USA in Turkey, which was within target range of
USSR and their satellite states. Thus, Khrushchev adopted a
defensive stance by placing missiles in Cuba, hoping that it would
stop further US aggression upon USSR and its allies, including
Cuba. Since my contextual knowledge supports Source C, Source
8

-- 15 of 24 --

16
C is a reliable source in evaluating whether the US blockade of
Cuba in 1962 was justified.
*Candidates should not be checking the reliability of Sources D and
E since it was done in Q1d.

-- 16 of 24 --

17
Section B: Structured-Essay Questions
2a) Explain why Japan attacked Pearl Harbour in December 1941.
Level Descriptor Marks
1 Discusses the topic without answering the question
Award 1 mark for each detail, up to a maximum of 2.
e.g. Japan attacked Pearl Harbour because they were confident of
their military capability.
1 – 2
2 Describes the reasons
Award 3m for identification without description and 4m for a
detailed description.
e.g. Japan attacked Pearl Harbour because they wanted to
remove USA as a potential threat to their expansionist plans
in Southeast Asia. Japan had plans to expand into Southeast Asia
to gain land and resources to help mitigate the problems they faced
in their countries. To ensure swift victory, Japan waited for Hitler’s
attack in Europe to distract the colonial powers before embarking
on their attacks in Southeast Asia. However, it was clear that USA
would interfere with Japan’s expansionist polices as they had
changed their foreign policy, with President Roosevelt declaring
that aggressor nations needed to be ‘quarantined’, using Japan’s
aggression to justify military aid to China. Following that, trade and
oil embargo were placed on Japan in response to their aggression
towards China.
e.g. Japan attacked Pearl Harbour because they hoped to
avoid war with the USA without sacrificing Japan’s prestige.
When Japan occupied Vietnam in 1940, President Roosevelt
imposed a trade embargo on Japan, formally banning the export of
steel, scrap iron and fuel to Japan. The Japanese navy and army
chiefs had advised the emperor that their stockpiled oil reserves
would run out within two years and that war with the USA could not
be avoided. Yet, the Japanese politicians by this stage, could not
afford to back down without facing anger and power of the military
factions. Neither did the emperor want to embarrass himself or
endanger their imperial interests in China.
3 – 4
3 Explains the reasons
Award 5-6 marks for one explained factor.
Award 7-8 marks for two explained factors.
e.g. Japan attacked Pearl Harbour because they wanted to
remove USA as a potential threat to their expansionist plans
in Southeast Asia. Japan had plans to expand into Southeast Asia
to gain land and resources to help mitigate the problems they faced
in their countries. To ensure swift victory, Japan waited for Hitler’s
5 – 8

-- 17 of 24 --

18
attack in Europe to distract the colonial powers before embarking
on their attacks in Southeast Asia. However, it was clear that USA
would interfere with Japan’s expansionist polices as they had
changed their foreign policy, with President Roosevelt declaring
that aggressor nations needed to be ‘quarantined’, using Japan’s
aggression to justify military aid to China. Following that, trade and
oil embargo were placed on Japan in response to their aggression
towards China. As a result, Japan theorized that USA would
interfere with their plans to invade Southeast Asia and decided that
their best course of action was to cripple the American Pacific Fleet
and in turn, securing their victory in Southeast Asia.
e.g. e.g. Japan attacked Pearl Harbour because they hoped to
avoid war with the USA without sacrificing Japan’s prestige.
When Japan occupied Vietnam in 1940, President Roosevelt
imposed a trade embargo on Japan, formally banning the export of
steel, scrap iron and fuel to Japan. The Japanese navy and army
chiefs had advised the emperor that their stockpiled oil reserves
would run out within two years and that war with the USA could not
be avoided. Yet, the Japanese politicians by this stage, could not
afford to back down without facing anger and power of the military
factions. Neither did the emperor want to embarrass himself or
endanger their imperial interests in China. As a result, the emperor
approved plans to attack Pearl Harbour, hoping that a quick
‘knockout’ blow against the USA and rapid expansion southwards
would convince the Americans to negotiate a peace settlement,
thereby avoiding war with USA without sacrificing the country’s
status and prestige.

-- 18 of 24 --

19
2b) ‘Allied victory in the war in Asia-Pacific was mainly due to the weaknesses of
Japan.’ How far do you agree with this statement? Explain your answer.
Level Descriptor Marks
1 Discusses the topic without answering the question
Award 1 mark for each detail, up to a maximum of 2.
e.g. Japan surrendered in 1945 and ended WWII in Asia-Pacific.
1 – 2
2 Explains Yes OR No
Award 3 marks for an explanation and further marks for additional
reasons or supporting detail for reasons, up to a maximum of 6
marks.
e.g. Yes, the Allied victory in the war in Asia Pacific was
mainly due to the weaknesses of Japan because Japan could
not defend their overextended empire effectively. By 1942,
Japan had overstretched itself, having occupied almost the whole
of Southeast Asia, conquering countries like Malaya, Indonesia,
the Philippines and Singapore, but with little resources left to
maintain and defend them. Furthermore, key military defeats by
the Allies against the Japanese forces also decimated the
numbers of experienced Japanese pilots and aircraft carriers. For
example, their battle in the Philippines, the Japanese navy lost
four carriers, three battleships, ten cruisers and nine destroyers.
As such, the Japanese forces could not effectively defend the new
territories while struggling to keep up with the war effort. This
placed extra strain on the already thinning resources Japan had
in the first place, making it clear that Japan could not sustain the
war and outlast the attacks from the Allied powers, resulting in
their inevitable defeat.
OR
e.g. No, the Allied victory in the war in Asia Pacific was also
due to Allied strengths because USA had military and naval
superiority compared to the Japanese. Despite the attack on
Pearl Harbour, USA managed to fight back against the Japanese
effectively. With the use of three aircraft carriers of the US Pacific
Fleet that remained after the Pearl Harbour attack in December
1941, USA managed to launch the Doolittle Raid, attacking
Tokyo, Nagoya and Kobe successfully. Furthermore, USA
managed to turn the tide of the war in the Battle of Midway from
3 to 6 June 1942, where they managed to stop Japan’s attack on
the small Midway islands that would have provided them
geographical advantage. In the attack, USA managed to hide their
carriers in the open sea and launched surprise attacks on the
Japanese, resulting in the latter losing four of their aircraft carriers
and nearly three quarters of their experienced pilots. As a result
of USA’s superior military strategies and strengths that resulted in
3 – 6

-- 19 of 24 --

20
heavy casualties for Japan, the latter thus never really managed
to recover their military might to overpower USA, causing their
defeat. Therefore, the Allied victory in the war in Asia Pacific was
also due to Allied strengths.
OR
No, the Allied victory in the war in Asia Pacific was because
of Allied victory in Europe. From the beginning of war, the
Japanese had to rely on the continued success of Hitler’s armies
in Europe to distract the Allies. Both Roosevelt and Churchill,
leaders of USA and Britain had recognised Japan’s reliance and
planned to defeat Hitler before moving on the Japan in Southeast
Asia. Once Germany had been defeated, Japan had lost its major
partner in the war. As a result, the Japanese had to face the might
of the Allied powers alone amidst their dwindling resources.
Hence, they could not hope to overpower the Allied powers and
win the war, leading to their ultimate defeat.
3 Both aspects of L2
Award 7 marks for an explanation of Yes and an explanation of
No and further additional reasons or supporting detail for reasons,
to a maximum of 10 marks.
7 – 10
4 L3 plus weighted conclusion
Award the higher marks for a more developed answer.
e.g. In conclusion, it was the Japan’s weakness that resulted in
their defeat in the war in Asia-Pacific. It is quite clear that both
Japan and USA started war in Asia-Pacific with their military
lacking their fullest potential. Despite the devastating attack of
Pearl Harbour, USA brilliantly deployed whatever is left of their
resources strategically to minimise casualties and further secure
victory. On the other hand, Japan had never been able to defeat
USA in terms of military strategy, even when they had the upper
hand in the wake of the attack of Pearl Harbour. Moreover, they
needed to spread their already limited resources across their
empire, which was only growing by their sheer number of victories
across Asia-Pacific. It was only a matter of time that Japan gets
defeated since they only grew weaker as the war dragged one,
and it eventually became impossible for them to overpower the
Americans and outlast the war.
11 – 12

-- 20 of 24 --

21
3a) Explain why the Soviet Union and the USA were unable to agree during the
wartime conferences.
Level Descriptor Marks
1 Discusses the topic without answering the question
Award 1 mark for each detail, up to a maximum of 2.
e.g. Soviet Union and USA were discussing post war terms in 1945,
with Hitler defeated in Europe and the Allied powers setting their
sights on Japan in Southeast Asia.
1 – 2
2 Describes the reasons
Award 3m for identification without description and 4m for a
detailed description.
e.g. Soviet Union and USA were unable to agree during the
wartime conferences because of their ideological differences.
Soviet Union and USA had fundamentally different political
ideologies which resulted in each of them seeking different aims
from the post-war conferences. For example, in Soviet Union’s bid
to safeguard communism within Eastern Europe, they disagreed
on USA’s aim of revitalising Europe’s economy so countries could
be a vital trading partner of USA. Similarly, the proposal for
economic reconstruction of Europe’s economy was based on
USA’s political ideology of democracy and a capitalist economy.
e.g. Soviet Union and USA were unable to agree during the
wartime conferences because of their deep mistrust of one
another, causing further tensions during the post war
conferences. For example, instead of facilitating free elections in
Poland as agreed upon in Yalta, Stalin arrested non-communist
Polish leaders and established a new communist government in
Poland, alarming USA. On USA’s part, while they had asked for
Soviet’s help in defeating Japan during the Yalta Conference,
they had not informed Soviet Union of the development of the
atomic bomb. However, information about the Manhattan Project
had been leaked to the Soviets, causing further mistrust and
tensions. In fact, Truman had hoped that the atomic bomb would
give USA political leverage over the Soviet Union in the post-war
negotiations.
3 – 4
3 Explains the reasons
Award 5-6 marks for one explained factor.
Award 7-8 marks for two explained factors.
e.g. Soviet Union and USA were unable to agree during the
wartime conferences because of their ideological differences.
Soviet Union and USA had fundamentally different political
ideologies which resulted in each of them seeking different aims
from the post-war conferences. For example, in Soviet Union’s bid
5 – 8

-- 21 of 24 --

22
to safeguard communism within Eastern Europe, they disagreed
on USA’s aim of revitalising Europe’s economy so countries could
be a vital trading partner of USA. Similarly, the proposal for
economic reconstruction of Europe’s economy was based on
USA’s political ideology of democracy and a capitalist economy. In
addition, both countries could not agree upon the developments for
post war Poland, as USA wanted Poland to hold free elections to
choose its own government while Soviet Union wanted Poland to
be under communist influence. As a result, it is evident that with
two different ideologies, Soviet Union and USA would inevitably
arrive at different plans for post-war Europe, thus contributing to
disagreements in the post-war conferences.
e.g. Soviet Union and USA were unable to agree during the
wartime conferences because of their deep mistrust of one
another, causing further tensions during the post war
conferences. For example, instead of facilitating free elections in
Poland as agreed upon in Yalta, Stalin arrested non-communist
Polish leaders and established a new communist government in
Poland, alarming USA. On USA’s part, while they had asked for
Soviet’s help in defeating Japan during the Yalta Conference, they
had not informed Soviet Union of the development of the atomic
bomb. However, information about the Manhattan Project had
been leaked to the Soviets, causing further mistrust and tensions.
In fact, Truman had hoped that the atomic bomb would give USA
political leverage over the Soviet Union in the post-war
negotiations. As a result of Soviet Union and USA’s actions,
antagonising one another throughout the post-war conferences,
relationships only worsened and tensions rose, making it
impossible for both countries to come to agreements in the post-
war negotiations.

-- 22 of 24 --

23
3b) ‘The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 was due to Gorbachev’s policies.’ How
far do you agree with this statement? Explain your answer.
Level Descriptor Marks
1 Discusses the topic without answering the question
Award 1 mark for each detail, up to a maximum of 2.
e.g. Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, after Gorbachev became the
leader from 1985.
1 – 2
2 Explains Yes OR No
Award 3 marks for an explanation and further marks for additional
reasons or supporting detail for reasons, up to a maximum of 6
marks.
e.g. Yes, the collapse of Soviet Union in 1991 happened
mainly due to Gorbachev’s policies as he failed to resolve
the problems that USSR was facing. By 1985, USSR had been
facing many problems, like corruption, declining economy, and
political instability due to the unhappiness among the Soviets.
Gorbachev introduced the policies of Glasnost and Perestroika to
resolve these problems. Glasnost promoted openness, which
encouraged the people of USSR to provide feedback for the
government to improve and meet their needs. This resulted in
criticisms from political dissidents boldly verbalising the problem
plaguing Soviet Union, bringing to light the atrocities Stalin and
other opposition leaders had committed during their reign as well
as the economic problems that USSR faced. Additionally,
Perestroika, which meant restructuring, promoted small private
business and individual profits, moving away from the essence of
command economy that Soviet Union had relied on and upsetting
communist hardliners. As a result, Glasnost and Perestroika each
made matters worse for Soviet Union, worsening social and
economic instability. It was thus unavoidable that the people
would call for the end of the Communist Party in search for better
days and standard of living.
OR
e.g. No, the collapse of Soviet Union was not due to
Gorbachev’s policies, but mainly the weaknesses of Soviet
economy. USSR adopted a command economy, which was
fundamentally weaker compared to the free market economy
adopted by USA and its allies. The command economy
essentially required all state industries to be government owned,
with no freedom of information and creativity. Citizens were also
not allowed to start businesses, resulting in a lack of
competitiveness and growth among the businesses in the nation.
Furthermore, the declining economy was due also to their
increased spending on military. As the leader of the Warsaw Pact,
3 – 6

-- 23 of 24 --

24
the USSR had to spend millions on troops to support its allies.
Defence spending also increased when the USSR invaded
Afghanistan in 1979. The USSR also provided financial support
to Eastern European countries through COMECON. As a result,
with little to no revenue and a huge economic debt, a declining
economy made it impossible for USSR to prosper in the long run.
No, the collapse of Soviet Union was not due to Gorbachev’s
policies, but due to external economic burdens of the Soviet
Union. The Soviet Union had been supporting poorer communist
economies in Eastern Europe as they were bound to their satellite
states through the Warsaw Pact. Besides relying on Soviet oil and
resources, Eastern European countries also borrowed heavily
from Western banks in the 1970s, resulting in high debt that
Soviet Union had to be responsible for. In addition, the decade-
long Soviet-Afghan War also caused a huge drain on Soviet
Union in terms of money, resources and human casualties. As a
result, Soviet Union’s commitments to their satellite states and the
war slowly drained Soviet of their resources with no form of aid
provided to them, leading to the eventual collapse of Soviet
Union.
3 Both aspects of L2
Award 7 marks for an explanation of Yes and an explanation of
No and further additional reasons or supporting detail for reasons,
to a maximum of 10 marks.
7 – 10
4 L3 plus weighted conclusion
Award the higher marks for a more developed answer.
e.g. In conclusion, the collapse of Soviet Union was not due to
Gorbachev’s policies because the sheer magnitude of the
problem that USSR faced had been too huge for Gorbachev to
put an end to it alone. The weaknesses that Soviet Union faced
were largely due to the fundamental structural weaknesses of the
command economy brought upon by their communist beliefs,
something that USSR had been adopting since the beginning of
the days of communist Russia. It is, arguably, the root cause of
most issues that USSR faced by 1985. Gorbachev’s leadership
merely highlighted the flaws, bringing them to light and worsened
the mistrust among the people against the government, which had
also been present even before Gorbachev’s reign but merely
silenced. Hence, it was not due to Gorbachev’s leadership that
led to the collapse of USSR, but a longstanding structural
weakness that made it eventual fall unavoidable.
11 – 12

-- 24 of 24 --