Section A: Source-Based Case Study
Question 1 is for all candidates
Study the Background Information and the sources carefully, and then answer all the questions.
You may use any of the sources to help you answer the questions, in addition to those sources which you are
told to use. In answering the questions, you should use your knowledge of the topic to help you interpret and
evaluate the sources.
1 	(a) 	Study Source A.
What is the message of Source A? Explain your answer, using details of the source and
your knowledge. 	[5]
(b) 	Study Sources B and C.
How far does Source C help you to decide if Truman was telling the truth in Source B?
Explain your answer. 	[6]
(c) 	Study Source D.
How surprised are you by Source D? Explain your answer. 	[5]
(d) 	Study Sources E and F.
To what extent would the cartoonist in Source E have agreed with the historian in Source
F? Explain your answer. 	[6]
(e) 	Study all the sources.
‘The Communist Bloc escalated tensions in Korea to spread communism.’ How far do
the sources support this view? Explain your answer. 	[8]
2025 Preliminary Examination/CCHMS/Secondary 4/History/2174/02 	[Turn over

-- 1 of 7 --

2
Who was to blame for escalating tensions in the Korean War?
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Read this carefully. It may help you answer some of the questions.
On 25 June 1950, three years of intense fighting began between North and South Korea. Soon, Korea
became the centre of the watching world as North Korean forces supported by Chinese troops battled
an international coalition of nations led by the United States, under the authority of the United Nations.
Both sides attempted to win the war, but they would reach an eventual stalemate and armistice in
1953. How did tensions escalate until this point? Who was to blame for causing such tensions in
Korea?
Source A: 	A leaflet dropped by the United States in North Korea, 3 April 1953. It reads:
‘So-called Soviet advisers are Russian special agents to control China. Stay safe
and keep fit for fighting against the Communist Soviet puppets!’
2025 Preliminary Examination/CCHMS/Secondary 4/History/2174/02

-- 2 of 7 --

3
Source B: Truman speaking at a press conference on 29 June 1950.
We are not at war. The Republic of Korea was set up with the United Nation’s help. It is a
recognised government by the members of the United Nations. It was unlawfully attacked by a
bunch of bandits from North Korea. The United Nations Security Council held a meeting and
passed a resolution on the situation and asked the members to go to the relief of the Korean
Republic. The members of the United Nations are going to the relief of the Korean Republic to
suppress a bandit raid on the Republic of Korea. That is all it is.
Source C: An extract taken from Truman’s memoirs published in 1965.
In my generation, this was not the first time that the strong had attacked the weak. Communism
was acting in Korea just as Hitler, Mussolini and the Japanese had acted fifteen, twenty years
earlier. I felt certain that if South Korea was allowed to fall, Communist leaders would be
emboldened to override nations close to our own shores. If the Communists were permitted to force
their way into the Republic of Korea without opposition from the free world, no small nation would
have the courage to resist threats and aggression by stronger Communist neighbours.
Source D: 	A report by the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(DPRK, North Korea), transmitted by radio on 25 June 1950
Early on the morning of 25 June 1950, troops of the so-called ‘army of national defence’ of the puppet
government of South Korea began a surprise attack on the territory of North Korea along the entire 38th
parallel. Having begun a surprise attack, the enemy invaded the territory of North Korea to a depth of one or
two kilometres north of the 38th parallel in the area west of Haeju and in the areas of Geumcheon and
Cheolwon.
The government of the DPRK has charged the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Republic with warning the
authorities of the puppet government of South Korea that if they do not immediately halt their reckless
military operations in the areas north of the 38th parallel, decisive steps will be taken to subdue the enemy
and that they will bear full responsibility for all the serious consequences of these reckless military
operations.
2025 Preliminary Examination/CCHMS/Secondary 4/History/2174/02 	[Turn over

-- 3 of 7 --

4
Source E: 	A leaflet by the United Nations, dropped in Korea. It depicts a Russian Officer riding
on the back of Mao Ze Dong. The leaflet is titled ‘Road to Failure’. The text reads:
‘Chinese Subservience - The Chinese Communists bend body and knees to Soviet
Russia!’
Source F: 	Adapted from a Chinese historian on China’s entry in the Korean War, 1990
China's decision to intervene in the Korean War has its historical roots. It was the natural result of gradually
developed animosity between the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and the United States, and of fear of a
threat from the latter.
The Chinese leaders had no intention at all of intervening in the war at its beginning, and they provided only
moral support for Kim Il- Sung. On 27 June, Truman not only ordered direct American air and naval support
for South Korea but also decided to reintervene in the Chinese civil war by positioning the 7th Navy Fleet
between the Chinese mainland and Taiwan. On 10 July, the ‘Committee of Chinese People Against U.S.
Invasion of Taiwan and Korea’ was established in Beijing. On 5 and 18 August, Mao ordered the Army to
finish all battle preparations before the end of September.
2025 Preliminary Examination/CCHMS/Secondary 4/History/2174/02

-- 4 of 7 --

5
Section B: Essays
Answer two questions.
2 ‘The Marshall Plan started the Cold War.’ How far do you agree with this statement? Explain
your answer. 	[10]
3 ‘The main reason for Malaya’s independence was the Malayan Emergency.’ How far do you
agree with this statement? Explain your answer. 	[10]
4 ‘The main reason the French lost the First Indochina War was due to poor military planning and
leadership.’ How far do you agree with this statement? Explain your answer. 	[10]
2025 Preliminary Examination/CCHMS/Secondary 4/History/2174/02 	[Turn over

-- 5 of 7 --

6
BLANK PAGE
2025 Preliminary Examination/CCHMS/Secondary 4/History/2174/02

-- 6 of 7 --

7
BLANK PAGE
Copyright Acknowledgements:
Source A: 	http://www.psywarrior.com/DivideandConquer.html, leaflet 7240
Source B: 	https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/the-presidents-news-conference-624
Source C: 	Memoirs by Harry S. Truman, 1 January 1965.
Source D: 	June 25, 1950 Report of the DPRK Ministry of Internal Affairs, History and Public Policy Program Digital Archive,
Wilson Center, Translated by Gary Goldberg
Source E: 	http://www.psywarrior.com/DivideandConquer.html, leaflet 7234
Source F: 	Hao Yufan, Zhai Zhihai, China's Decision to Enter the Korean War: History Revisited, The China Quarterly, 121
(Mar, 1990), pp. 94-101
2025 Preliminary Examination/CCHMS/Secondary 4/History/2174/02 	[Turn over

-- 7 of 7 --