2261/02 Prelims 2024 4E History Elective MS
Deyi Secondary School
MARKING SCHEME
1 (a) Study Source A. Are you surprised by what the source says? Explain your answer. [6]
L1: Undeveloped provenance
e.g. I am surprised as it is produced by “Veterans of Peace” to offer another perspective on
Korean war
1
L2: Surprised / Not Surprised for what it tells about the Korean War
Award 2 marks for one aspect [surprised OR not surprised] and 3 marks for both
aspects [i.e. surprised AND not surprised] OR more developed answers.
e.g. I am surprised as it is actually different from the common American understanding/ narrative/
perspective of the Korean war by pointing out that it was the Americans who initiated the Korean
War as US wanted to establish a democratic South Korea. This can be seen from the source
which shows “The truth is that the Korean War really started in 1945 when the U.S. suppressed
the KPR government and imposed its military rule in the southern part of Korea.” I am surprised
as the changed narrative came from an American himself.
2-3
L3: Answers which attempt to evaluate what is said by cross-reference to other sources or
contextual knowledge
Award 4 marks for an explanation and 5 marks for more developed answers
e.g. I am surprised as I feel that US would not have wanted to initiate the Korean War as based
on my contextual knowledge, I know that that the Americans were initially not interested in the
affairs of Korea. This can be seen from the fact that Korea was not part of the American defensive
perimeter. (4m) US have even started withdrawing the troops from Korean from 1949 onwards.
This is a clear indication that they were reluctant to be too involved in the war, much less initiate
it. (5m)
4-5
L4: Answers which evaluate the source as in L3 but argue that you are not surprised based
on the purpose in context
e.g. Upon closer examination of the provenance, I am not surprised by the source as Source A
is written by Veterans for Peace which is likely to advocate for peace and show a biased
perspective of the Korean War. As a member of Veteran for peace, it is likely that the author’s
purpose is to show how fighting in a war was unnecessary so as to discourage the American
public from supporting future government’s decision to get itself involved in a distant place like
Korea. As I can explain and understand the purpose of the source, I am not surprised.
6
O Preliminary Examination 2024
Secondary 4 Express

-- 1 of 9 --

2261/02 Prelims 2024 4E History Elective MS
1 (b) Study Source B. Why was this cartoon published in June 1950? Explain your answer. [5]
L1: Sub-message
i.e., about the Korean War
e.g. It is to show that North Korea was invaded
1
L2: Specific context of June 1950
i.e. because of the immediate aftermath of the invasion on 25 June 1950
e.g. It is to show how the North was trying to justify their invasion in June 1950
2
L3: Main message
i.e. to mock the North Koreans
e.g It was published to mock/ ridicule the North Koreans for attempting to falsify the narrative.
The cartoon shows how the North Korean military leader explaining to the very confused Korean
man how the South was the one who invaded the North first. The map he was making reference
to is obviously upside down, showing how inaccurate his account was.
3-4
L4: Reason based on purpose
i.e. because of what the cartoonist wanted the readers to feel
e.g. By doing so, the American cartoonist wanted to stir hatred and anger towards the North
Koreans and support the American government in helping to defend and protect the South
Koreans.
5
1 (c) Study Sources C and D. Does Source D prove Source C wrong? Explain your
answer.
[6]
L1: Answers based on undeveloped provenance
e.g. Of course it does not prove Source C wrong. One is a speech by the American President
and the other is a North Korean author. Both would naturally disagree with each other as they
are at the opposing sides of the war.
1
L2: They agree, so Source D does not prove Source C wrong 2

-- 2 of 9 --

2261/02 Prelims 2024 4E History Elective MS
e.g. No, D does not prove C wrong as they agree that the Americans were involved militarily in
the Korean war. Thus, as they both agree on US involvement, Source D does not prove Source
C wrong. In source C, the line “the challenge has been presented. We must meet it squarely.”
Indicate the US readiness to be involved in the war. Similarly, in Source D, the sources states
that “US imperialists, who harboured the wild dream of dominating the world with Korea as a
springboard” paints a picture of American intention to be involved in the Korean war so that they
could further expand in other parts of the world. Thus, both sources show the US having a role
to play in the war.
L3: They disagree, so Source D does prove Source C wrong
e.g. Yes, Source D proves that Source C is wrong as they disagree on who are the ones to be
blamed for the Korean war. Truman blamed the Communists for the attack while Source D
blamed the US for causing the war. President Truman in Source C blamed the “Communists
forces for attacking Republic of Korea.” This implies that he pointed to the North Koreans and the
USSR for starting the conflict. Source D, on the other hand, blames the Americans for their
imperialist ambitions that caused the war in Korea to break out.
3
L4: Both aspects of L2 and L3 4
L5: Identifies the disagreement, but uses cross-reference to decide which source is wrong.
e.g. Obviously the sources disagree. Source C blamed the Communists & painted a picture of
how the Communists needed to be stopped from further expansion while Source D blamed the
American calling them imperialists who wanted to take over Korea.
Source D is supported by Source A which also indicated that the Americans were the main cause
of the Korean War. Source A stated that the Korean war originated in 1945 when US “suppressed
the KPR government and imposed its military rule in the southern part of Korea.” This shows that
they promoted the violence by supporting the cruel South Korean regime. As Source D is
supported by Source A, it therefore proves that Source C is wrong.
5
L6: Identifies the disagreement but uses evaluation of the author’s purpose to decide which
is wrong (Either or both source(s) can be evaluated)
e.g. In the final analysis, Source D could not prove Source C wrong as both sources are produced
with a clear agenda in mind to win the support of the people in the respective countries. As such,
the sources are both are highly subjective and bias to their own narratives. Even though for
instance, Source D was published in 1993, but true to the national interest of the North Koreans,
the narrative where the Americans were portrayed as the villains would be more acceptable.
6
1 (d) Study Source E. What does this source show you about the reason for US
intervention in Korea?
[5]
L1: Describes the source. 1

-- 3 of 9 --

2261/02 Prelims 2024 4E History Elective MS
L2: Answers which misinterpret the source or does not address the reason for intervention.
e.g. It tells me that US is the protector of South Korea.
2
L3: Answers based on details of the source which are not explained.
e.g. It tells me that if America were to back away from the challenge posed by North Korea, their
reputation will be affected badly.
3
L4: Answers which show reason for intervention and explain the main message.
(Award 4 marks for one element of the main message, and 5 marks for two elements of the main
message.)
e.g. It tells me that the reason for US intervention in Korea is mainly to appear strong and to
protect their reputation as the “protector of South Korea”. According to Mr Acheson, the US
perceive the North invasion of the South as a challenge which they need to take on. (4m) Thus
to keep up an image as the defender of a democratic South Korea, he asserted that they need to
stand up against the South or it would be an insult to their strength and will affect their reputation
as well. (5m)
4-5
1 (e) Study all the sources. ‘The U.S. intervention in Korea was a strategic error.’ How far
do these sources support this view? Use the sources and your knowledge to explain
your answer.
[8]
L1: Writes about the hypothesis, no valid source use. 1
L2: Yes OR No, supported by valid source use
(Award 1 mark for each source use up to a maximum of 4 marks.)
e.g. I think that Source A clearly shows that the US intervention in Korea was a strategic error as
it resulted in them supporting the very corrupt regime in the South that imprisoned or killed
hundreds of thousands of Korean nationalists and socialists in order to establish a separate, pro-
American government in the South.” It is a strategic error as in trying to establish their presence
in Korea, the Americans supported the killing of many lives and escalated the situation that
brought the 2 sides to war.
2-4
L3: Yes AND No, supported by valid source use
(Award 5 marks for 1Y and 1N, and additional mark for each supporting source use, up to a
maximum of 7 marks.)
e.g. [As L2 plus] However, Source C does not support the view because it shows that the United
States intervened to protect the interest of “Free Nations” such as South Korea and that the
invasion by the North was an “outright breach of the peace and a violation of the Charter of the
United Nations.” Thus, the US had to intervene and it was not a strategic error as they were
defending the free nations.
5-8

-- 4 of 9 --

2261/02 Prelims 2024 4E History Elective MS
Bonus of two marks (i.e. +1, +1) for use of contextual knowledge to evaluate a source in
relation to its reliability, sufficiency etc. but the total for the question must not exceed 8.
e.g. Source D soes not show that the American intervention is a strategic error as Mr Acheson
felt that the Communist need to be stopped after they invaded South Korea. His tone was very
determined as he stated that the invasion “was an undisguised challenge to America’s position
as South Korea’s protector”. He added that they should not turn away from this challenge as it
would be detrimental to their “strength and reputation.” This clearly indicate that US have high
stakes to be involved in the Korean war and hence it is not a strategic error. However, I question
the reliability of this source as Mr Acheson was an advisor of the Truman administration and
although the memoirs was written in 1969, which is many years after the Korean conflict, the
purpose of the publication of his memoir may be to highlight the strong stand US took against
Communism in the 50s. As he would tend to be bias and rather one sided in his assessment of
the situation, this source may not be totally in showing that US intervention is Korea is not a
strategic error.
Section B: Essay Questions
2 “Hitler’s strong base of support was the main reason that led to the rise of Nazi
party between 1920s to 1930s.” How far do you agree with the statement? Explain your
answer. [10]
L1: Identifies/Describes how the “strong base of support” led to the rise of Nazi
party or other reasons for the rise
(Award 1 mark for identifying one reason, 2 marks for identifying 2 or more. Award
2 marks for describing one reason and 3 marks for describing 2 or more.
e.g. One base of support Hitler had was the wealthy businessmen. Hitler had the
backing from the wealthy elite. Hitler actively sought the support of affluent
businessmen, assuring them that if he gained power, he would destroy
Communism and the Trade Unions.
1–3
L2: Explains how the “strong base of support” led to the rise of Nazi party OR
Explains other reasons for the Rise of Nazism
Award 4 marks for an explanation of strong base of support that led to Hitler’s rise
OR how other reason(s) that facilitated his rise, and an additional mark for
additional reason(s) or further supporting detail, to a maximum of 5 marks.)
4–5
L3: Explains how the “strong base of support” led to the rise of Nazi party AND
Explains other reasons for the Rise of Nazism
Award 6 marks for an explanation of the strong base and another reason that led
to Hitler’s rise, and additional mark for further supporting detail or reason, to a
maximum of 8 marks.
6–8

-- 5 of 9 --

2261/02 Prelims 2024 4E History Elective MS
e.g. One base of support Hitler had was the wealthy businessmen. Hitler had the
backing from the wealthy elite. Hitler actively sought the support of affluent
businessmen, assuring them that if he gained power, he would destroy
Communism and the Trade Unions. Because of this, the rich businesses saw
Hitler as someone who could stop the Communist threat and gave him money to
run his campaigns. With their financial support, the Nazis were able to reorganize
the party, hire the SA, and run propaganda and election campaigns. This allowed
the Nazi propaganda machine to operate on a large scale, reaching more people.
As such, the additional funds allowed Hitler and his Nazi party to reach out to the
other levels of the society and further strengthened support for the Nazis leading
to their rise.
AND
e.g. Another factor that contributed to the rise of Nazism is the circumstances that
hit Germany at that time – the Great Depression. This period meant that many
Germans were living in terrible conditions for the third time in their living memory.
It affected people from all walks of life and many of them turned to the Nazis to
`save’ them. Many of those who were unemployed during the Depression felt that
Nazi policies offered the chance of new jobs in a stronger Germany they could be
proud of. The Nazis offered hope, jobs and pride – an attractive alternative.
e.g. [As L2 plus] In conclusion, the think the Great Depression was a more
influential factor that contributed to the rise of the Nazis. With the poor economic
situations, the stage was actually set for Hitler to act upon; hence winning the
support of the people. In this case, they could use the Great Depression as the
stage that was manipulated by the Nazis. The Great Depression is fundamentally
the root cause that helped in the rise of the Nazis who were intelligent enough to
ride on its effects on Germany and its people. A very important result of the Great
Depression was that it made it possible for the Nazi to become a mass party.
9-10
3 “Japan’s appetite for territorial control ultimately caused its downfall in World War
II.” How far do you agree with the statement? Explain your answer. [10]
L1: Identifies/Describes how “Japan’s appetite for territorial control” led to its
downfall in WW2.
Award 1 mark for identifying one reason, 2 marks for identifying 2 or more. Award
2 marks for describing one reason and 3 marks for describing 2 or more.
e.g. The Japanese appetite for territorial control led to its downfall. In the early
stages of the war, Japan successfully conquered many territories in Asia. They
had a huge appetite for territorial conquests. By 1942, Japan occupied almost the
whole of SEA and had overstretched itself.
1–3

-- 6 of 9 --

2261/02 Prelims 2024 4E History Elective MS
L2: Explains how the “Japan’s appetite for territorial control” led to its downfall
in WW2 OR Explains other reasons for Japan’s downfall
Award 4 marks for an explanation of “Japan’s appetite for territorial control” OR
other reason(s) that contributed to Japan’s downfall, and an additional mark for
additional reason(s) or further supporting detail, to a maximum of 5 marks.)
4–5
L3: Explains how the “Japan’s appetite for territorial control” led to its downfall
in WW2 AND Explains other reasons for Japan’s downfall
(Award 6 marks for an explanation of how “Japan’s appetite for territorial control”
and another reason that its downfall, and additional mark for further supporting
detail or reason, to a maximum of 8 marks.)
e.g. The Japanese appetite for territorial control led to its downfall. In the early
stages of the war, Japan successfully conquered many territories in Asia. They
had a huge appetite for territorial conquests. By 1942, Japan occupied almost the
whole of SEA and had overstretched itself. However, these territories, while
providing the much needed resources for Japan, also caused them to stretch their
resources. Japan did not possess the manpower, weapons and resources
necessary to defend itself as well as its conquered territories against the Allies.
Japan was also further weakened when it lost its resources and manpower as the
Allies launched a quick and sudden attack on the Japanese-controlled Pacific
island. This led to Japan’s defeat as Japan’s limited resources was insufficient to
sustain a war against the Allies.
AND
e.g. Another key determinant of the downfall of Japan in WW2 was the military
might of the US. USA’s might in terms of military and economic strength was one
of the reasons that contributed to Japan’s defeat. USA’s industrial capacity was
larger than Japan because it had a huge resource base to draw on. At its peak, it
could turn out over 70,000 tanks and 120,000 aircraft a year. This means that the
Japanese could survive the war as long as the Americans did not get involved in
the war. In addition, Japan was further weakened when American submarines
sunk Japan’s vessels; causing Japan to unable to get the necessary resources it
needed for the war. America was also determined to defeat Japan. Hence, when
the Americans entered the war, it became difficult for Japan to defeat such a
powerful force. It was overpowered and thus was defeated. The allied victory in
Europe also meant that USA could focus on defeating Japan, sealing its fate.
6–8
e.g. [As L2 plus] In conclusion, the overwhelming military and economic power of
the United States, combined with its unwavering determination to defeat Japan
after the attack on Pearl Harbor, was the decisive factor in the outcome of the
Pacific War. Had Japan faced a less formidable adversary, it might have been
able to retain its territories and mount a more effective defense. However, the
sheer might of the United States ensured that Japan's fate was sealed upon
America's entry into the war. The superior resources, industrial capacity, and
strategic prowess of the US made it impossible for Japan to withstand the
sustained military pressure, ultimately leading to Japan's inevitable defeat.
9-10

-- 7 of 9 --

2261/02 Prelims 2024 4E History Elective MS
4 “The reforms that Gorbachev introduced was the main reasons that led to the
collapse of Soviet Union.” How far do you agree with the statement? Explain your
answer. [10]
L1: Identifies/Describes how “the reforms that Gorbachev introduced” led to the
collapse of SU.
(Award 1 mark for identifying one reason, 2 marks for identifying 2 or more. Award
2 marks for describing one reason and 3 marks for describing 2 or more.)
e.g. I agree as SU collapsed due to Gorbachev's mistakes. Gorbachev's
introduction of Perestroika was flawed. Despite the reforms, small business
owners still faced high taxes and corruption. Furthermore, Perestroika was
implemented without ensuring adequate infrastructure, such as roads, to support
the transport and sale of goods.
1–3
L2: Explains how “the reforms that Gorbachev introduced” led to the collapse
of SU OR Explains other reasons for the collapse.
Award 4 marks for an explanation of the “reforms that Gorbachev introduced” OR
how other reason(that led to the collapse of Soviet Union, and an additional mark
for additional reason(s) or further supporting detail, to a maximum of 5 marks.)
4–5
L3: Explains how “the reforms that Gorbachev introduced” led to the collapse
of SU AND Explains other reasons for the collapse.
Award 6 marks for an explanation of the “reforms that Gorbachev introduced” AND
how other reasons led to the collapse of Soviet Union, and additional mark for
further supporting detail or reason, to a maximum of 8 marks.)
e.g. I agree as SU collapsed due to Gorbachev's mistakes. Gorbachev's
introduction of Perestroika, which aimed to restructure the Soviet economy, was
deeply flawed. Despite the intention to boost economic efficiency, small business
owners continued to face high taxes and pervasive corruption. The lack of a
coherent plan to address these issues meant that many of the intended economic
benefits never materialized. Furthermore, Perestroika was implemented without
ensuring adequate infrastructure, such as roads, to support the transport and sale
of goods. This logistical oversight hindered economic development and trade.
Furthermore, his implementation of glasnost, which aimed to promote openness
and transparency, inadvertently encouraged the people in Eastern European
Soviet satellite states to demand democratic reforms and choose their own
governments. This policy undermined the traditional control the Soviet Union had
over these states and led to a surge of nationalist movements and uprisings.
AND
e.g. However, there are other reasons that caused the collapse of Soviet Union.
The long term structural weaknesses of its own command economy is another
important factor. A command economy is a system where the state makes all
economic decisions, including how resources are allocated. This was especially
6–8

-- 8 of 9 --

2261/02 Prelims 2024 4E History Elective MS
prevalent since the 1970s when the Soviet economy underwent a period of
stagnation that was exacerbated by the USSR’s political system that stifled debate
and made reform difficult. As a result, the USSR not only could not keep up with
the USA’s economic growth, but also could not adequately provide for its citizens.
For example, the continued lack of consumer goods in favour of military production
led to widespread dissatisfaction and proved to have a destabilising effect on the
USSR, as people lost faith in the Soviet government, leading eventually to its
collapse.
e.g. [As L2 plus] Overall, I agree. Although Gorbachev's policies contributed
significantly to the eventual collapse of Soviet Union, the problems were deeply
rooted long before his tenure. The Communist ideology and practices, established
by his predecessors, had already created numerous issues and widespread
dissatisfaction by the time Gorbachev became General Secretary in 1985. By the
time Gorbachev assumed leadership, these systemic problems had festered for
decades, eroding the foundation of the Communist regime. His attempts to reform
the system through policies like glasnost and perestroika, while well-intentioned,
ultimately exposed the underlying weaknesses and accelerated the unraveling of
the Soviet Union. Therefore, while Gorbachev's actions played a crucial role in the
collapse, it is important to recognize that the seeds of discontent had been sown
long before his arrival, rooted in the failures and missteps of his predecessors.
9-10

-- 9 of 9 --