This document consists of 6 printed pages.
ST. MARGARET’S SCHOOL (SECONDARY)
Preliminary Examinations 2023
CANDIDATE NAME
CLASS REGISTER NUMBER
HUMANITIES (HISTORY)
Paper 2 The Making of the Contemporary
World Order, 1900s—1991
Secondary 4 Express / 5 Normal (Academic)
2273/02
23 August 2023
1 hour 40 minutes
Additional Materials: NIL
READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST
Write your name, registration number and class on all the work you hand in.
Write in dark blue or black pen.
Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid on your answer scripts.
Section A
Answer all parts of Question 1.
Section B
Answer one question.
At the end of the examination, fasten scoresheet, Sections A and B together.
The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question.
The total of the marks for this paper is 50.

-- 1 of 19 --

2
Section A: Source-Based Case Study
Question 1 is compulsory for all candidates.
Study the Background Information and the sources carefully, and then answer all the questions.
You may use any of the sources to help you answer the questions, in addition to those sources you
are told to use. In answering the questions, you should use your knowledge of the topic to help you
interpret and evaluate the sources.
1 a) Study Source A.
What can you learn from this source about the lives of the Soviets under the Great
Terror? Explain your answer. [5]
b) Study Sources B and C.
How similar are these sources as evidence about Stalin’s Soviet Union?
Explain your answer. [5]
c) Study Sources D and E.
Does what Source E says make you surprised about what was said in Source D?
Explain your answer. [6]
d) Study Source F.
How useful is this source as evidence about the Great Terror? Explain your
answer. [6]
e) Study all the sources.
‘The Great Terror was necessary for Stalin to control the Soviet Union.’ How far do
these sources support this statement? Explain your answer. [8]

-- 2 of 19 --

3
[Please turn over
Stalin’s Great Terror
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Read this carefully. It may help you answer some of the questions.
The period of Great Terror was initiated by Stalin in mid-1934 and lasted till 1938 to preserve control
over the Soviet Union. This period consisted of three major features: the show trials of leading
members of the Politburo and senior army officers, purges of a vast number of Communist Party
members, and the arrest of ordinary citizens suspected to be ‘enemies of the state’. These methods
were successful in eliminating many of Stalin’s opponents. It was estimated that at least 10 million
people died during Stalin’s Great Terror. Subsequent leaders after Stalin such as Khruschev felt that
the methods used in the Great Terror were too harsh and went on to criticise Stalin’s rule during this
period.
Did Stalin really need to use these methods to preserve control over the Soviet Union?
Source A: An account by a survivor of the Great Terror in 1970.
[Please turn over
With regard to the Great Terror, we could never imagine it would end. It was essential to smile
because if you did not, it meant that you were afraid or discontented. Everybody who worked for
the State had to walk around wearing a cheerful expression, as though to say, ‘What’s going on
is no concern of mine. I have very important work to do, and I am terribly busy. My conscience is
clear and if somebody has been arrested, there must be a good reason.’ The mask was taken
off only at home. Some people had adapted to the terror so well that they knew how to profit from
it—there was nothing out of the ordinary about denouncing a neighbour to get his apartment or
his job.

-- 3 of 19 --

4
Source B: An extract from a book ‘Stalin’ written by Issac Deutscher, a communist based in
Poland in 1961.
Source C: Extract from a history reference book by a British author, 1997.
Source D: From the autobiography of L. Kopelev, a member of the Communist Party published
in 1981 after Stalin’s death. Kopelev was imprisoned from 1945 to 1954 for speaking
out against Russian atrocities in World War II.
Source E: From a speech by Khrushchev in a Politburo meeting with key communist members
in 1956.
[Please turn over
Stalin offered his nation a positive and new programme of social organisation which, though
caused suffering for many, but also created undreamt-of openings for others. For nearly three
years, his iron broom had furiously swept every office in the state. Not a single administrator who
had held office in 1936 could be around by the end of 1938. The purges created numberless
vacancies in every field. From 1933 to 1938 about half a million administrators, technician,
economists, and men of other professions graduated, and filled the ranks of the purged and
emptied offices. These men, brought up in the Stalinist cult from childhood, threw themselves into
their work with a zeal and enthusiasm undimmed by recent events of the Great Terror.
Between the years 1934 to 1938, hundreds of important officials were arrested, tortured, made
to confess to all sorts of crime such as plotting with Trotsky or with capitalist government to topple
the Soviet state. They were also forced to appear in a series of ‘show trials’ at which they were
certainly found guilty and sentenced to death or labour camp. The purges were successful in
eliminating possible alternative leaders and terrorising the masses into obedience, but the
consequences were serious: many of the best brains in the government, in the army and in the
industry has disappeared.
I regarded the purge trials of 1937 and 1938 as an expression of some far-sighted policy. I
believed that Stalin was right in deciding on these terrible measures to discredit all forms of
political opposition, once and for all. We, the communists had to be united, knowing neither
indecisiveness nor doubt. Therefore, the opposition leaders had to be depicted as villains, so
that the people would come to hate them. Finding myself in prison, I did not lose my conviction
as in prison, I became even more consistent a Stalinist.
It became apparent that many Party members who were branded during the period of the Great
Terror as ‘enemies’ were actually never enemies or spies but were always honest Communists.
Stalin was a distrustful man, sickly suspicious. This suspicion created in him a general distrust,
even toward eminent Party workers whom he had known for years. Everywhere and in everything
he saw ‘enemies’ and ‘spies’. Possessing unlimited power, he indulged in great willfulness and
choked a person morally and physically. A situation was created when one could not express
one own’s will.

-- 4 of 19 --

5
Source F: A Soviet photograph of factory workers voting for the arrest of the ‘enemy
of the state’ in 1937.
[Please turn over

-- 5 of 19 --

6
Section B: Structured Essay Question
Answer one question.
2 This question is about World War II in the Asia-Pacific.
(a) Explain why Japan occupied China in the 1930s. [8]
(b) ‘The main reason why Japan was defeated in World War II was the military
successes of the Allied Powers.’ How far do you agree with the statement?
Explain your answer. [12]
3 This question is about the Cold War.
(a) Explain why Cuba became friendly with the Soviet Union in 1960–1961. [8]
(b) ‘The main reason why the Soviet Union collapsed was the increased
resistance from the Eastern European countries.’ How far do you agree with
the statement? Explain your answer. [12]
END OF PAPER
Acknowledgements:
Source A: https://books.google.com.sg/books/about/Hope_Against_Hope.html?id=04hKe40uq_oC&redir_esc=y
Source B: https://moodle.swarthmore.edu/pluginfile.php/63172/mod_page/content/1/Week_11/Deutscher.PDF p. 383
Source C Norman Lowe; Mastering Modern World History; Bloomsbury Publishing; 2022
Source D: Paul Kiem; Skills in Modern History; 1993
Source E: https://www.digitalhistory.uh.edu/disp_textbook.cfm?smtID=3&psid=3634
Source F: https://www.rferl.org/a/1077282.html

-- 6 of 19 --

7
4E/5N ELECTIVE HISTORY
PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION ANSWER SCHEME
SECTION A (SBCS)
(a) Study Source A.
What can you learn from this source about the lives of the Soviets under the Great Terror? Explain
your answer. [5]
Level Descriptor Marks
L1 Describes the source with no focus on the question OR
lifts information from the source
1
L2 Discusses sub-message(s)/Without links to the Great Terror or lives of the
Soviets
Award 3m for supported answers
E.g. From the source, I learn that people do not care for one another. Source A
states, ‘Some people had adapted to the terror so well that they knew how to profit from
it—there was nothing out of the ordinary about denouncing a neighbour to get his
apartment of his job.’ This shows that people had no empathy for their fellow citizens
and was happy to live well in another person’s misery.
Answers that do not address lives of the Soviets would fall in this level
2–3
L3 Valid inference of the source (Able to link point with Stalin’s Great Terror).
Award 5m for answer well-explained answer
E.g. I learned that the Soviets lived a pretentious life during the Great Terror.
Source A states, ‘With regard to the Great Terror, we always knew that it is on and off,
but that it might end—this we could never imagine. It was essential to smile—if you did
not, it meant you were afraid or discontented.’ This implies how everyone was careful
not to offend the state by looking happy and satisfied as they were worried about
consequences of defying Stalin during this period.
4–5
(b) Study Sources B and C.
How similar are these sources as evidence about Stalin’s Soviet Union? Explain your answer. [5]
Level Descriptor Marks
L1 Describes either source, does not answer question 1
L2 Explains similarity or difference, based on source content
Award 3m for supported answers
2–3
L3 Explains similarity and difference, based on source content 4–5

-- 7 of 19 --

8
Level Descriptor Marks
E.g. Both sources were similar in stating how Stalin’s Great Terror eliminated
many experienced personnel in the Soviet Union. Source B states, ‘For nearly
three years, his iron broom had furiously swept every office in the state. Not a single
administrator who had held office in 1936 could be around by the end of 1938. The
purges created numberless vacancies in every field.’ Similarly, Source C states,
‘Between the years 1934 to 1938, hundreds of important officials were arrested,
tortured, made to confess to all sorts of crime such as plotting with Trotsky or with
capitalist government to topple the Soviet state.’ This implies that many of the Soviets
who held important positions were systematically put away. This method allowed Stalin
to replace the Old Guards with newer ones in the various areas in the Soviet
administration.
E.g. Both sources are different in stating how Stalin was able to obtain absolute
obedience from the people. Source B states, ‘‘These men, brought up in the Stalinist
cult from childhood, threw themselves into their work with a zeal and enthusiasm
undimmed by recent events.’ This implies that it was Stalin’s cult of personality that was
able to influence the Soviets to serve Stalin with a sense of eagerness and passion. On
the other hand, Source C states, ‘The purges were successful in eliminating possible
alternative leaders and terrorising the masses into obedience.’ This implies that
obedience of the people was obtained through intimidation and fear.
OR
E.g. Both sources are different in stating the impact of Stalin's Great
Terror. Source B states, 'From 1933 to 1938 about half a million administrators,
technician, economists, and men of other professions graduated, and filled the ranks
of the purged and emptied offices. These men, brought up in the Stalinist cult from
childhood, threw themselves into their work with a zeal and enthusiasm.' This implies
that the Great Terror brought about a positive impact as Stalin was able to get people
to work towards the country's progress. On the other hand, Source C states, 'The
purges were successful in eliminating possible alternative leaders and terrorising the
masses into obedience, but the consequences were serious: many of the best brains
in the government, in the army and in the industry has disappeared.' Unlike Source C,
which states how the re-organisation of the different jobs benefited the Soviets, Source
C implies that the Great Terror brought misery to the Soviets through fear and, instead
of progress to the country, created a vacuum in the country's administration.
(c) Study Sources D and E.
Does what Source E says make you surprised about what was said in Source D? Explain
your answer. [6]
Level Descriptor Marks
L1 Uncritical acceptance of provenance of D and/or E
Responses that have no clear indication of sources’ agreement/ disagreement
1

-- 8 of 19 --

9
Level Descriptor Marks
L2 Surprised/Not surprised based on identification of disagreement in content
between D and E
Award 3 marks for identification disagreement between D and E, supported by discussion
of both sources.
2–3
L3 Surprised/Not surprised based on cross-reference to contextual knowledge or
other sources
Not surprised
E.g. I am not surprised by what the sources say about Stalin’s need for Great Terror
to curb opposition that may potentially posed a threat to his position as leader of
the Soviet Union. Source D states, ‘I believed that Stalin was right in deciding on these
terrible measures to discredit all forms of political opposition, once and for all.’ This
implies that Stalin’s drastic actions were to ensure that any form of opposition was not
provided the opportunity to take root. Similarly, Source E states, ‘Possessing unlimited
power, he indulged in great willfulness and choked a person morally and physically. A
situation was created when one could not express one own’s will.’ This implies that any
freedom to speak one’s mind will not be tolerated and will be dealt with severely.
Use of other source
E.g. By cross-referencing, Source C supports this with ‘The purges were successful in
eliminating possible alternative leaders and terrorising the masses into obedience’. This
implies that the purge was successful in ensuring that all opposition to Stalin’s power was
successfully dealt with. Additionally, such methods would also ensure that a person’s
spirit would be completely broken and as a result, nobody would dare to oppose him due
to fear. As Source C supports Sources D and E, I am thus not surprised by the comments
made in Sources D and E.
OR
Use of contextual knowledge
E.g. Based on what I know about Stalin’s rule, I know that Stalin remained paranoid about
being removed from his position as leader of the Soviet Union. Thus, he ensured that
popular leaders from Lenin’s time was removed to secure his position in the Politburo.
The Great Terror was thus put in place to remove leaders such as Kirov, Bukharin,
Zinoviev and Kamenev to ensure that his popularity as a leader was secured.
Surprised
E.g. I am surprised by how the sources depict the Great Terror. Source D sees the
Great Terror as necessary for the greater good, to preserve communist ideology.
However, Source E depicts the Great Terror as a tool used by Stalin to further his
own agenda, and that is to eliminate all possible opponents to preserve his power
and not the communist ideology. Source D states, ‘We, the communists had to be
united, knowing neither indecisiveness nor doubt. Therefore, the opposition leaders had
to be depicted as villains, so that the people would come to hate them.’ This implies that
the need to stay united as a Communist Party is essential and thus, whoever Stalin
deemed as ‘enemies of the state’ would be readily accepted by the Party, whether or not
the person was really guilty. On the other hand, Source E states, ‘This suspicion creates
in him a general distrust, even toward eminent Party workers whom he had known for
years. Everywhere and in everything he saw ‘enemies’ and ‘spies.’ This implies that
Khrushchev felt that the Stalin only cared for himself and not the communist ideology as
4–5

-- 9 of 19 --

10
Level Descriptor Marks
depicted in Source D as he was willing to kill anyone that posed a threat to him in order
to preserve his control in the Soviet Union.
Other possible answers on surprised: Source D depicts that the Great Terror was
beneficial whereas the Source E depicts the Great Terror as not beneficial.
Use of contextual knowledge
E.g. I am surprised as what I know supports Source E and challenges Source D. Stalin
had killed many of his old compatriots and Kirov, who was also his protégé in succeeding
him as the next leader of the Soviet Union. Thus, the reason for Stalin’s Great Terror was
not for the unification of the Communist Party, but rather to secure his own position as
leader of the Soviet Union. As what I know supports Source E and challenges Source D,
I am thus surprised by the different depictions of the Great Terror in Source D from Source
E.
L4 Not surprised based on analysis of context
Award 6m for answers that discuss the different in context for both sources
E.g., I am not surprised by what the sources say about the necessity of the Great
Terror, as both are said by communists in different contexts. Source D states, ‘We,
the communists had to be united, knowing neither indecisiveness nor doubt. Therefore,
the opposition leaders had to be depicted as villains, so that the people would come to
hate them.’ This implies that the need to stay united as a Communist Party is essential,
and thus, whoever Stalin deemed as ‘enemies of the state’ would be readily accepted by
the Party, whether or not the person was guilty. This was stated in his autobiography,
published much later after Stalin’s death. As he still believed in the communist ideology,
he felt that what Stalin did was for the benefit of the country in ensuring that communism
was preserved.
Source E on the other hand, was said by Khrushchev, a leader who just assumed
power after Stalin’s death. Source E states, ‘It became apparent that many Party, Soviet
and economic activists who were branded during the period of the Great Terror as
‘enemies’ were actually never enemies, spies but were always honest Communists.
Stalin was a distrustful man, sickly suspicious.’ This implies that he wanted to ensure that
the period of Great Terror was not repeated, and the strong words used in depicting how
Stalin was ‘a distrustful man, sickly suspicious’ showed his disdain for the former leader.
As this was said in a meeting with key Communist members, he would have wanted them
to see that there would be a different kind of leadership and would want to get their
support/As this was said in a meeting with key Communist members, he would want them
to know how his policies differ from Stalin as Khrushchev was not in agreement with what
Stalin had done and Khrushchev wanted to implement political reforms to move away
from Stalin’s harsh policies.
As both sources are said in a different context with different intentions, I am thus not
surprised that what Source E says about the Great Terror is different from Source D.
5–6
(d) Study Source F.
How useful is this source as evidence about the Great Terror? Explain your answer. [6]

-- 10 of 19 --

11
Level Descriptor Marks
L1 General answers that do not respond to the question 1
L2 Simplistic reasoning to useful / not useful
Superficial interpretation of provenance
E.g. This source is not useful as this is a propaganda source in showing how the Soviets
were willing to listen to Stalin. [2 marks]
2
L3 Useful/ Not useful based on content
Award 3 marks for supported answers
E.g. The source is useful in showing how the workers agreed to the execution of the
enemies of the state without objection. Source F shows everyone looking contented
raising their hands in agreement to favour of having the enemies of the state executed.
This implies that the workers complied with the execution of their fellow citizens and
seemed to agree with what Stalin’s orders.
2–3
L4 Useful based on cross-reference to another source or contextual knowledge/Not
useful based on the reliability of the source
Based on cross-reference to contextual knowledge
E.g. The source is useful in stating how the Great Terror created a society who is
compliant in supporting the decisions made by Stalin. Source F shows everyone looking
contented raising their hands in favour of having the enemies of the state executed. This
implies that the workers complied with the execution of their fellow citizens and seemed
to agree with Stalin’s orders.
Based on what I know, it was not possible for the workers to object to the execution of
the enemies of the state due to the nature of the police state in the Soviet Union, and it
is more likely for the workers to approve the execution. In addition, this was during the
period of the Great Terror, where any opposition would receive severe punishment such
as death or be sent to labour camps. As what I know corroborates Source F, Source
F is thus reliable and hence useful in stating how the Great Terror created a society
who is compliant in supporting the decisions made by Stalin.
Cross-refer to another source
Cross-reference to Source A where people in Soviet would choose to obey rather than
to defy to avoid unwanted consequences.
OR
Based on reliability of source
E.g. Source F is limited in its usefulness in stating how the Great Terror created a society
who is completely obedient to Stalin’s rule as this source is not reliable. Source F shows
everyone looking contented raising their hands in agreement to favour of having the
enemies of the state executed. This implies that the workers complied with the execution
of their fellow citizens and seemed to agree with what Stalin’s orders.
Based on what I know, propaganda such as Source F was used to show other Soviets
how the workers unanimously agreed to the execution of the enemies of the state, and
this would have convinced the other Soviets that it was indeed true that those who were
put on trial were guilty. As Source F is propagandistic in nature, the source is thus
not reliable and hence limited in its usefulness in stating that everyone agreed to
the execution of the enemy of the state.
4–5

-- 11 of 19 --

12
Level Descriptor Marks
L5 Useful but not reliable based on the source being a propaganda source
E.g. Source F is limited in its usefulness in stating how the Great Terror created a society
who is completely obedient to Stalin’s rule as this source is not reliable. Source F shows
everyone looking contented raising their hands in agreement to favour of having the
enemies of the state executed. This implies that the workers complied with the execution
of their fellow citizens and seemed to agree with what Stalin’s orders.
Based on what I know, propaganda such as Source F was used to show other Soviets
how the workers unanimously agreed to the execution of the enemies of the state and
this would have convinced the other Soviets that it was indeed true that those who were
put on trial were guilty. As Source F is propagandistic in nature, the source is thus
not reliable and hence limited in its usefulness in stating that everyone agreed to
the execution of the enemy of the state.
Although Source F is not reliable, it still helps us understand why the Soviets were willing
to listen to Stalin without opposition. The source shows that propaganda such as this was
why the Great Terror was successful. It gave the people the impression that everyone
was supportive of the show trials and execution, and thus they too, dare not
disobey. Thus, despite its limitations, Source F is still useful in depicting the
method used by Stalin to garner support and unquestionable obedience for him to
fully control the Soviet Union.
6
(e) Study all the sources.
‘The Great Terror was necessary for Stalin to control the Soviet Union.’ How far do these sources
support this statement? Explain your answer. [8]
Level Descriptor Marks
L1 Writes about the hypothesis, no valid source use 1
L2 Support OR Does not support, supported by valid source use
Award 2 marks for one Support OR Does not support with valid source use, and an
additional mark for each subsequent valid source use up to a maximum of 4m
Support
E.g. Source A supports the statement that the period of the Great Terror was necessary
for Stalin to control the Soviet Union. Source A states, ‘What’s going on is no concern of
mine. I have very important work to do, and I am terribly busy. My conscience is clear
and if somebody has been arrested, there must be a good reason.’ The mask was taken
off only at home.’ Hence the source supports that the period of the Great Terror was
necessary to control any form of opposition from the Soviets. Many of the Soviets
obediently comply with what was happening in the country as they did not want to
be arrested. Hence, their real self only surfaced at the privacy of their own home.
Thus, the Great Terror was necessary to control any form of dissatisfaction with
regard to Stalin’s rule as not all Soviets were convinced by Stalin’s methods.
2–4

-- 12 of 19 --

13
Level Descriptor Marks
E.g. Source B supports the statement that the period of the Great Terror was necessary
for Stalin to control the Soviet Union. Source B states, ‘These men, brought up in the
Stalinist cult from childhood, threw themselves into their work with a zeal and enthusiasm
undimmed by recent events of the Great Terror.’ This implies that the Great Terror was
essential to eliminate all the Old Guards who could pose a threat to Stalin. With
vacancies available, Stalin could now encourage more Soviets who were
influenced by his cult of personality to join him and inevitably provide him with the
opportunity to better control them and the Soviet Union as a whole.
E.g., Source C supports the statement that the period of the Great Terror was necessary
for Stalin to control the Soviet Union. Source C states, ‘The purges were successful in
eliminating possible alternative leaders and terrorising the masses into obedience.’
Hence, the Great Terror was necessary as through the mass execution of Soviets,
the Soviets were forced to obey Stalin out of fear which made it easier for Stalin to
continue ruling the Soviet Union without opposition.
E.g. Source D supports the statement that the period of the Great Terror was necessary
for Stalin to control the Soviet Union. Source D states that, ‘We, the communists had to
be united, knowing neither indecisiveness nor doubt. Therefore, the opposition leaders
had to be depicted as villains, so that the people would come to hate them. This implies
the Great Terror provided the platform for the communists to stay united. Hence,
any opposition, whether true or not, was not important. Hence, the period of the
Great Terror was necessary for Stalin to control the Soviet Union as this method
would have stemmed all opportunities for dissidents to voice their discontent. This
inevitably preserved Stalin’s leadership and, ultimately, the communist ideology in
the Soviet Union.
Does not support
E.g., Source E does not support the statement that the period of the Great Terror was
necessary for Stalin to control the Soviet Union. Source E states, ‘It became apparent
that many Party members who were branded during the period of the Great Terror as
‘enemies’ were actually never enemies, spies but were always honest Communists.
Stalin was a distrustful man, sickly suspicious.’ This implies that the method used by
Stalin was not necessary as those Stalin deemed as ‘enemies of the state’ were in truth
innocent. Thus, Source E does not support the statement as violent methods used
in the Great Terror was not necessary to control the Soviet Union as the opposition
by Party members were imagined rather than a reality and hence, Stalin’s position
was in fact already secured.
E.g. Source F does not support the statement that the period of the Great Terror was
necessary for Stalin to control the Soviet Union. Source F shows a group of workers
raising their hands in agreement to the execution of the enemy of the state. This implies
that the people of the Soviet Union agreed with the purges and were happy to vote for
those found guilty to be executed. Hence, Source F does not support the statement
in showing how the Great Terror was necessary to control the people in Soviet
Union as it is shown in the source how they are agreeable to support Stalin’s harsh
method to eliminate the ‘enemies of the state’.
L3 Support AND Does not support, supported by valid source use 5–8

-- 13 of 19 --

14
SECTION B: Structured-Essay Questions
2 This question is about World War II in the Asia-Pacific.
Explain why Japan occupied China in the 1930s. [8]
Level Descriptor Marks
L1 General description of Japan’s war with no reference to the question
Award 1 mark for each detail up to a maximum of 2
1–2
L2 Describes reasons for Japan’s occupation of China
Award 3m for description of one reason
Award 4m for description of two reasons
3–4
L3 Explains reasons for Japan’s occupation of China
Award 5-6m for explanation of one reason
Award 7-8m for explanation of two reasons
E.g. One reason for Japan’s occupation of China was to obtain resources for its
economic survival. Japan had limited resources and had to rely on trade with other
countries to import essential resources such as oil. However, restrictive trading
practices, especially after the Great Depression, made it even more difficult for
Japan to obtain the raw materials it needed from markets it did not directly control.
Thus, the expansionist policy to China, especially Manchuria, would provide them
with resources such as minerals and wheat. It would also provide Japan with land
for the growing population. Its subsequent conquest of China after the Second-Sino
Japanese War also gave them a bigger share of the country and unlimited access
to resources. Hence, the acquisition of resources for its economic survival
was a reason for Japan’s occupation of China, as China was big enough to
fulfil Japan’s goals for economic gains and to further support its expansionist
efforts.
E.g. Another reason for Japan’s occupation of China was the League’s
ineffectiveness in dealing with Japan’s increasingly aggressive actions. When
Japan occupied Manchuria, the League of Nations responded by commissioning
an investigation. The result was just a condemnation of Japan as an aggressor, and
the League refused to recognise Manchukuo. However, the Japanese delegation
walked out of the assembly and the Japanese government formally withdrew from
the League of Nations. Thus, the League was unable to enforce its decision upon
Japan. Similarly, when Japan started the Second Sino-Japanese War in 1937,
China appealed to the League of Nations to intervene. The Western powers,
5–8
Level Descriptor Marks
Award 5 marks for one Support and Does not support by valid source use, and an
additional mark for each subsequent valid source use up to a maximum of 8m
For L2 and L3, award a bonus of up to two marks (i.e. +1/+1) for use of contextual
knowledge to question a source in relation to its reliability, utility, sufficiency etc. The total
mark must not exceed 8.

-- 14 of 19 --

15
Level Descriptor Marks
occupied with developments in Europe, did not provide any. As a result, Japan
started a full-scale invasion of China after which. Hence, the League’s
ineffectiveness in dealing with Japan’s increasingly aggressive actions was
a reason for Japan’s occupation of China because without external
intervention, Japan became bolder in its expansionist policy and hence, was
able to assert a larger influence in China.
(b) ‘The main reason why Japan was defeated in World War Two was the military successes of the Allied
Powers.’ How far do you agree with the statement? Explain your answer. [12]
Level Descriptor Marks
L1 Writes about World War Two with no focus on the question
Award 1 mark for each detail up to a maximum of 2
1–2
L2 Explains Agree OR Disagree
Award 3-4 marks for weak explanation
Award 5-6 marks for good explanation
Award the higher range for good use of historical details
3–6
L3 Explains Agree AND Disagree
WW = 7, WG = 8, GG = 9
(with additional information) = 10
E.g. A reason for Japan’s defeat was due to the military successes of the Allied
Powers. An example of the Allied successes was the Battle of the Coral Sea in 1942.
Despite being a draw, the battle created sufficient damage to the Japanese naval
fleets and the attack on Port Moresby was cancelled. It was a victory for the Allies as
Japan’s southward advance was halted. Another significant battle was the Battle of
Midway, where the Japanese lost four aircraft carriers and nearly three-quarters of
their experienced pilots. This severely affected their naval and air defence capabilities
throughout the war. The Japanese could not replace their numbers, unlike the Allied
Powers, whose combined effort helped strengthen resources and troops. Hence, the
military successes of the Allied Powers were a reason for Japan’s defeat
because it crippled Japan’s resources and affected the morale of the troops. As
a result, they could not recuperate fast enough to continue fighting an enemy
who had become stronger due to these military successes.
E.g. Another reason for Japan’s defeat was the dropping of the atomic bomb. The
Americans dropped two atomic bombs on Japan, and many Japanese were killed
instantly as a result of the incredible heat and blast wave of the explosion. Many
Japanese were also injured and affected by the radiation of the atomic bomb. As
much as Japan wanted to continue with the war, they could not do so as this had dire
economic and social consequences on the country. Japan’s manpower and resources
were completely wiped out by the effects of the atomic bomb. Hence, the dropping
of the atomic bomb was a reason for the defeat of Japan because the two
bombs destroyed Japan’s morale to continue fighting. As a result, Japan lost
much of its resources, rendering it helpless to continue with war efforts.
7–10
L4 Level 3 plus a balanced conclusion based on an explicit consideration of ‘How
far?’
Award the higher mark in the level for more developed answers.
11–12

-- 15 of 19 --

16
Level Descriptor Marks
E.g. In conclusion, I disagree that the military successes of the Allied Powers led to
Japan’s defeat. Although the military successes did cripple Japan’s resources
and manpower to a certain degree, it was the dropping of the atomic bomb that
completely demoralised Japan. The bomb paralysed much of its economic and
military capability, and the extent of the damage was so great that Japan was not able
to rebuild its capacity to fight in the war. This was unlike its defeat in the various battles
with the Allied Powers, as even after each defeat, the Japanese, with their strong
sense of nationalism, were able to fight on. Hence, I would say that it was the dropping
of the atomic bomb that led to the defeat of Japan, as Japan was not able to revive
itself after that and continue with the war.
3 This question is about the Cold War.
(a) Explain why Cuba became friendly with the Soviet Union in in 1960–1961. [8]
Level Descriptor Marks
L1 General description of Cuba with no reference to the question
Award 1 mark for each detail up to a maximum of 2
1–2
L2 Describes reasons for Cuba’s friendly relations with the Soviet Union
Award 3m for description of one reason
Award 4m for description of two reasons
3–4
L3 Explains reasons for Cuba’s friendly relations with the Soviet Union
Award 5-6m for explanation of one reason
Award 7-8m for explanation of two reasons
E.g., One reason why Cuba became friendly with the Soviet Union was due to USA's
action in putting economic sanctions on Cuba. When Castro became leader in 1959,
Castro's first economic priority was to sell sugar. Aware that the Cuban economy was
overly reliant on the Cuban Sugar Quota—where the American government would
determine the amount and price of sugar to be purchased from Cuba—Castro decided
to expand its sugar market and agreed to barter Cuban sugar for Soviet oil. However,
the USA perceived Cuba's trade relations with the Soviet Union as a sign Cuba was
aligning with the communist bloc. The USA reduced the Cuban Sugar quota from 3
million tonnes to half the volume, making Cuba more determined to ally with the Soviet
Union to continue with the sugar trade. The USA further intensified its economic
campaign against Cuba by placing an embargo on American exports to Cuba except
for food and medicine. Soviet Union stepped in and fulfilled Cuba's financial needs by
buying much of its sugar and ensuring that Cuba could survive economically without
trade from the USA. Hence, the economic sanctions imposed by the USA were a
reason Cuba became friendly with the Soviet Union. During this time, when
Cuba had no one to depend on in terms of surviving economically, the Soviet
Union came to provide help and ensured that Cuba remained economically
viable.
E.g., Another reason why Cuba became friendly with the Soviet Union was because
of the need to be protected from USA’s aggression. An example would be the Bay of
Pigs invasion by American-sponsored Cuban rebels. Castro believed a large-scale
attack by the USA was inevitable and looked desperately for allies. Moreover, military
exercises by the US armed forces in the Caribbean, simulating the invasion of an
5–8

-- 16 of 19 --

17
Level Descriptor Marks
unarmed island, further unnerved Cuba. Aside from this, there were many instances
when the USA tried to remove Castro from power, with Operation Mongoose as an
example. This secret CIA operation consisted of assassination attempts on key
Cuban political leaders, including Castro. With such a threatening climate, Castro
accepted Soviet Union’s support and formed a friendship with the Soviet Union.
Hence, the need to be protected from USA’s aggression was a reason for
Cuba’s friendly relations with the Soviet Union because Cuba was concerned
about USA’s threat to their national security. A friendly relationship with the
Soviet Union would provide them with the necessary protection to deter the
USA from taking more aggressive military actions against them.
(b) ‘The main reason why the Soviet Union collapsed was the increased resistance from the
Eastern European countries.’ How far do you agree with the statement? Explain your answer. [12]
Level Descriptor Marks
L1 Writes about the communism in the Soviet Union with no focus on the question
Award 1 mark for each detail up to a maximum of 2
1–2
L2 Explains Agree OR Disagree
Award 3-4 marks for weak explanation
Award 5-6 marks for good explanation
Award the higher range for good use of historical details
3–6
L3 Explains Agree AND Disagree
WW = 7, WG = 8, GG = 9
(with additional information) = 10
E.g. A reason for the collapse of the Soviet Union was due to the increased resistance
from the Eastern European countries. The Eastern European countries had always
spoken out against the communist leadership. This was because the Soviet
leadership failed to stop the economic decline and treated its people in the satellite
states poorly. As early as the 1950s and in the 1960s, countries such as Hungary and
Czechoslovakia had constantly tried to assert their freedom through revolutions but
were successfully curbed by the Soviet Union. Gorbachev’s speech in 1988 at the UN
further sparked a new wave of resistance when he mentioned that the Soviet Union
recognised the right of all people to determine their own political and economic
system. It sparked the disintegration of the Soviet Union’s sphere of influence in
Eastern Europe and overturned the Brezhnev Doctrine. As a result of Gorbachev’s
speech, the Eastern European communist regimes collapsed one after another in
1989 under the pressure of popular revolutions that took place throughout the Eastern
European countries. Hence, the increase of resistance in Eastern Europe was a
reason for the collapse of the Soviet Union because the countries saw this as
an opportunity to break free from Soviet Union’s control. When this happened,
it was hard for the Soviet Union to curb the resistance. Since Gorbachev also
supported this move, it was easy for the resistance to be successful. Thus, the
increased resistance in Eastern Europe caused the Soviet Union to lose its
sphere of influence as well as diminishing the Soviet Union’s status as a
superpower leading to its collapse.
E.g. Another reason for the collapse of the Soviet Union was due the failure of the
Soviet economy. In the early 1970s, the Soviet economy began to stagnate. This was
7–10

-- 17 of 19 --

18
Level Descriptor Marks
partly because of the inherent flaws of the Soviet command economy, where the
government controlled the resource allocation of the different industries. The arms
race further burdened the Soviet economy with the USA. USA's economy improved
in the mid-1980s, and it was able to renew the arms race with a new programme
known as the 'Star Wars’ programme. This spurred the Soviet Union to mobilise their
own military build-up, which also put a toll on their economy. In addition to this, Soviet
Union's annual subsidy to its Warsaw Pact allies and its commitment to the Soviet-
Afghan War also caused a huge drain on the Soviet Union in terms of money,
resources, and human casualties. Hence, the failure of the Soviet economy was a
reason for the collapse of the Soviet Union as it did not have sufficient
resources to sustain the country's economic development, burdened mostly by
the inherent problems of a command economy and external economic burdens.
This caused a lot of discontent and unhappiness in the country, leading to more
protests and revolutions that undermined the credibility of the communist
ideology.
Other reasons: Gorbachev’s policies, USA’s economic strength
L4 Level 3 plus a balanced conclusion based on an explicit consideration of ‘How
far?’
Award the higher mark in the level for more developed answers.
E.g., In conclusion, I disagree that the increased resistance from the Eastern
European countries led to the collapse of the Soviet Union. Although there was
already resistance from these countries at an earlier stage, it remained under control
as the Soviet government still had the resources to curb the resistance. However, it
was the failure of the Soviet economy that led to its collapse, as without
sufficient economic resources and good planning, the people lost faith and
credibility in the government. This discontent led to more resistance which
ultimately led to the collapse of the Soviet Union. Its declining economy also led to
Soviet Union’s reduced capacity to interfere in the affairs of the Eastern European
countries. The Eastern European states thus took advantage of this to increase
resistance which inevitably led to Soviet Union’s collapse.
11–12

-- 18 of 19 --

19

-- 19 of 19 --