Marsiling Secondary School
G.C.E ‘O’ Level Preliminary Examination 2024
Subject: Humanities
Social Studies (2260/1, 2261/1,
2262/1)
Level / course: 4 Express
Date: 15 August 2024 Duration: 1 hr 45 mins
Name: ________________________________ Index No: ______ Class: _____________
READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST
Writing papers will be provided with this question paper. You should follow the instructions on the
front cover of the answer booklet. If needed, please ask the invigilator for additional writing papers.
Section A
Answer all questions.
Section B
Answer both questions.
The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question.
You should not spend too much time on any one question.
For Examiner’s Use
Section A
Section B
Total
Setters: Ms Sylvia Ho
This question paper consists of 8 pages, including the cover page.
35
15
50

-- 1 of 22 --

2
Section A (Source-Based Case Study)
Answer all questions.
Exploring Citizenship and Governance
Study the Background Information and the sources carefully, and then answer all the
questions.
You may use any of the sources to help you answer the questions, in addition to those
sources which you are told to use. In answering the questions, you should use your
knowledge of the topic to help you interpret and evaluate the sources.
(1) Study Source A.
What is the attitude of the author towards the government’s management of
sports facilities in Singapore? Explain your answer.
[5]
(2) Study Source B.
Why was the source published? Explain your answer. [6]
(3) Study Sources C and D.
After reading Source C, are you surprised by Source D? Explain your answer. [7]
(4) Study Source E.
How useful is Source E as evidence about Singapore’s progress to achieve
sporting success? Explain your answer.
[7]
(5) “Singapore is heading in the right direction to achieve sporting success.”
Using sources in this case study, explain how far you would agree with this
statement.
[10]

-- 2 of 22 --

3
What can be done to help Singapore achieve sporting success?
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
A strong sporting culture contributes to Singapore by fostering national pride and
cohesion and creating a healthier society.
The Singapore government's efforts to develop and support national sporting athletes in
preparing for national representation and *major games have sparked considerable
debate. With investments in modern facilities, structured training programs, and financial
incentives, the government aims to boost the success of high-performance national sports
teams and athletes.
However, critics argue that despite these initiatives, more needs to be done to enhance
athlete support, such as increasing funding, and improving athlete development pathways
from community and school levels.
Read the following sources to find out more about what can be done to help Singapore
achieve sporting success.
*Major games refer to high-profile multi-sport competitions such as South-East Asian (SEA) Games, Asian Games, and
Olympics.
Source A: An opinion article published by a member of an opposition party in
Singapore, 2023.
Barely three years ago, the Ministry of Culture, Communications and Youth (MCCY)
and Football Association Singapore (FAS) declared a national project, “Goal 2034”,
an ambition for Singapore’s Football Team to qualify for the 2034 World Cup. Charging
$30 to $50 per hour for the booking of this public community facility? How is restricting
the accessibility and development of grassroots soccer, especially amongst youths,
helpful to the attainment of Goal 2034?

-- 3 of 22 --

4
Source B: An article published on *Singapore Sports School’s website, 2021.
Sports School Alumni and Student-Athletes Shine at Tokyo 2020!
From thrilling showdowns to sailing their way into the medal race, Singapore Sports
School’s eight present and past student-athletes showed their grit in their first ever
Olympic appearance at the Tokyo 2020 Olympic Games held from 23 July to 8
August.
*Singapore Sports School is a specialised independent school in Singapore under the purview of MCCY that offers an
integrated sports and academic programme to high potential youth athletes in the secondary and post-secondary levels.
Source C: An excerpt from a speech made by Max Le Blond, the uncle of *Joseph
Schooling*, 2021.
Joseph’s travel to study overseas to nurture his Olympic dreams since he was 13 was
not paid for by the Singapore government. His fees at a very expensive school in Florida,
USA, were paid for by his parents. This particular school was chosen because it
specialised in combining academic and sporting excellence in swimming. His
accommodation, his specialist coaches, and his trips to various competitions were also
paid for by his parents. There was no or minimal “state money” for many years. After
high school, it was also the University of Texas who offered him a scholarship to continue
both his studies and pursuit to be a future Olympic medalist.
Government funding only came in very late, when Joseph had already made a name for
himself internationally at the highest levels.
*Joseph Schooling (born 1995) is a retired Singapore National Swimmer whose achievements include a gold medal at
the 2016 Summer Olympics and 32 gold medals across different editions of Asian Games and SEA Games.

-- 4 of 22 --

5
Source D: Adapted from Sport Singapore’s (SportSG) website, last updated 2023.
SportSG is the governing body for sports-related matters in Singapore.
The High Performance Sport System aims to provide the best support to Team SG
athletes so that they can fulfil their sporting aspirations and to inspire the Singapore
Spirit. Under the Sports Excellence (spex) system, enrolled Team SG athletes have
basic access to benefits such as competition funding and sports medicine services.
Opportunities such as spexScholarship, spexPotential, and spexGlow are also offered
for high potential athletes. Under these schemes, financial support such as monthly
allowance and competition funding is given to prepare athletes to train full-time and excel
at the major games.
While the intent is to contribute to the additional costs of meeting the demands of
international athlete, it is unlikely to meet all costs involved and is not intended to do so.
Source E: Adapted from a speech made by Mr Edwin Tong, Minister for Culture,
Community and Youth, 2021. The Ministry of Culture, Community and
Youth (MCCY) is the ministry overlooking SportSG.
The Government invests about $70 million annually into the High Performance Sport
system for our national athletes. I will also re-affirm the government’s commitment to
support Singaporeans at every level from grassroots participation to the highest point of
elite sporting achievement. We will continue to work with our sports stakeholders such
as schools, the various National Sports Associations, and ActiveSG to support and
enhance sports in Singapore.
Allow me to also speak about disability sports and its significance and value to society.
Sport can help to reduce the stigma and discrimination associated with disability. We
have stepped up support and funding of the entire disability sports ecosystem. This
includes the building of inclusive facilities and increasing the number of coaches and
volunteers who are trained to support disability sports.

-- 5 of 22 --

6
Source F: Adapted from an online petition titled “Save Turf City”, with comments
gathered from 2019 to 2023.
“If Urban Redevelopment Authority (URA) really takes back the land for
residential development by 2024, rugby will be in trouble. The 2000 members
of the various junior rugby clubs will not have a place to train and play. On a
normal rugby weekend, there are about 10 games being played there
throughout the day.”
“It would be devastating to lose one of the remaining sports hubs and massive
green spaces left in Singapore which consists of facilities equivalent to at least
14 football fields.”
“The sports community will be left without a venue where enthusiasts can run
around, and where competitive sports can be played to the highest level.”
“Where are people going to play cricket, football, rugby and touch rugby after
this?”

-- 6 of 22 --

7
Section B (Structured-Response Question)
Answer both questions.
Living in a Diverse Society
Extract 1
As a socio-culturally diverse society, Singapore has always grappled with sensitive issues
surrounding race, such as racism and racial discrimination. A series of high-profile racist
incidents in 2021 shook Singapore, including a former lecturer making racist remarks to
an interracial couple and a man charged over a racially aggravated attack against a 55-
year-old Indian woman.
Extract 2
Religion refers to the belief in and worship of a god or gods. Religions can shape the daily
practices and lifestyle of an individual and influence the architecture of urban spaces.
Extract 3
Socio-economic status (SES) refers to an economic situation shared by a group of
people. Occupation, income, education, and ownership of wealth are some factors that
could determine one’s SES.
(6) Extract 1 reflects that Singapore needs to do more to tackle racism.
What important messages would you share with Singaporeans to promote
racial harmony in Singapore? Explain your answer with reference to two
messages. [7]
(7) Extracts 2 and 3 are about how religion and socio-economic status contribute
to a diverse society.
Do you think that religion is more significant than socio-economic status in
contributing to the diversity of Singapore? Explain your answer. [8]

-- 7 of 22 --

8
Copyright Acknowledgements:
Source A https://www.theonlinecitizen.com/2023/07/01/unnecessary-fees-for-public-sports-facilities-and-the-stifling-of-
grassroots-soccer-in-singapore/
Source B https://www.sportsschool.edu.sg/news-and-publications/archive/aug21/team-sports-school-debutants-shine-at-tokyo-
2020
Source C https://mothership.sg/2021/08/joseph-schooling-uncle/
Source D https://www.sportsingapore.gov.sg/singapore-sport-institute/high-performance-planning/
Source E https://www.mccy.gov.sg/about-us/news-and-resources (5 Oct 2021 parliamentary matters on sports sector)
Source F https://www.change.org/p/you-save-turf-city-orto
Extract 1 Author’s own and https://www.channelnewsasia.com/commentary/race-ips-survey-discrimination-work-chinese-
malay-indian-2601676
Extract 2 Author’s own
Extract 3 GCE ‘N’ Level Social Studies Paper 2022
End of Paper

-- 8 of 22 --

9
Social Studies LORMS
Secondary 4E5N
Preliminary Examinations 2024
(1) Study Source A.
What is the attitude of the author towards the government’s management of
sports facilities in Singapore?
[5]
L1 Descriptive / Misinterpretation
0 if student does not phrase the response to answer to the author’s
attitude/thoughts/feelings
e.g. The author feels that charging $30-50 for the futsal court is not helpful
to the attainment of Goal 2034.
1
L2 Valid inference on the source but no attitude
Award the higher mark for answers with support
e.g. The author thinks that government’s actions of charging excessively for
a futsal court will stifle the growth of football in Singapore. As seen, the
government for charging a hefty sum of money “$30 - $50 per hour”. [3]
Valid attitude with no reference to rental rate
Award the higher mark for answers with support
e.g. The author is not supportive of the government’s management of sports
facilities as there is limited access for public members who wish to book the
field. As seen, the author feels that the government’s move stifles the
attainment of Goal 2034. [3]
2-3
L3 Valid attitude with reference to expensive/unaffordable rental rate
Award 5m for well-explained answer
The author is critical of the government’s way of managing sports facilities
in Singapore as he felt that the rental rates are too expensive. He was
clearly upset that the government for charging a hefty sum of money “$30 -
$50 per hour” for the booking of futsal courts and deems the move is
excessive. He also makes it clear that the government’s move appears to be
contradictory to its ambition of qualifying for World Cup 2034. This is seen
from “How is restricting the accessibility and development of grassroots
soccer, especially amongst youths, helpful to the attainment of Goal 2034?”.
4-5

-- 9 of 22 --

10
(2) Study Source B.
Why was the source published? Explain your answer.
Answer not presented as a reason = 0 mark.
[6]
L1 Reason based on provenance.
E.g. The source was published as the Sports School is supposed to
published photos of their alumni to make their website look good.
1
L2 Reason based on sub-message / literal interpretation of the source.
e.g. The source was published…
- to show that Sports School alumni and student-athletes represented
Singapore in the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. (literal information)
- to show that Singapore Sports School is very successful. (vague)
2
L3 Reason based on message / outcome / context only
Award 4m for answers with support
e.g. The source was published…
- to show that Singapore Sports School has contributed to producing quality
athletes in Singapore. (Message)
- to convince Singaporeans that government has put in the necessary
resources to nurture and develop our national athletes through the Singapore
Sports School. (Message)
- so that Singaporeans can understand and be aware of the plans and
programmes the government has in place to nurture youth athletes to
become successful in sports. (Outcome)
- so that high potential student-athletes with sporting ambitions can choose
Singapore Sports School as their choice school. (Outcome)
- because there are doubts from citizens on the government’s commitment
in nurturing our young athletes hence this article would showcase the
government’s success and efforts. (Context)
+ the relevant support depending on the reason given.
3-4

-- 10 of 22 --

11
L4 Answers based on 2 elements of L3
Award 6m for answers with context
Example – Message and outcome
e.g. The source was published to convince Singaporeans that government
has put in the necessary resources to nurture and develop our national
athletes through the Singapore Sports School so that high potential student-
athletes with sporting ambitions will choose Singapore Sports School as their
choice school. Source B shows me a photo collage showcasing some
talented athletes and alumni from Singapore Sports School who represented
Singapore in Tokyo 2020. The header of the article “Sports School Alumni
and Student-Athletes Shine at Tokyo 2020!” clearly reflects pride and
highlights these athletes’ achievements.
Example – Outcome + Context + Evidence
e.g. The source was published so that Singaporeans can understand and be
aware of the plans and programmes the government has in place to nurture
youth athletes to become successful in sports. An example of such plan is
having the Singapore Sports School as an institution under MCCY to nurture
athletes from a young age to eventually represent Singapore in competitions
such as the Olympics. Furthermore, there are doubts from citizens on the
government’s commitment in nurturing our young athletes hence this article
would prove the doubters wrong by showing that there are successful efforts
to nurture and develop youth athletes. Source B shows me a photo collage
showcasing some talented athletes and alumni from Singapore Sports
School who represented Singapore in Tokyo 2020. The header of the article
“Sports School Alumni and Student-Athletes Shine at Tokyo 2020!” clearly
reflects pride and highlights these athletes’ achievements.
5-6
3 Study Source C and Source D.
After reading Source C, are you surprised by Source D? Explain your
answer.
[7]
L1 Talks about sources with no surprise element
Addresses surprise element with undeveloped provenance.
e.g. Yes, Source C makes Source D surprising because they are from
different authors so obviously they would say different things.
1
L2 Addresses surprise element based on topic.
e.g. No, Source C does not make Source D surprising as they are both
talking about the development of local athletes / Singapore’s efforts in
achieving sporting success.
2

-- 11 of 22 --

12
L3 Surprised or not surprised based on internal content or provenance
of Source D without reference to Source C [3]
e.g. Source D is not surprising because the Singapore government obviously
needs to have quality programmes to develop its national athletes to achieve
sporting success, hence they came up with schemes like “spexScholarship”
and “spexPotential” which offer athletes financial support and allows them
to train full time.
3
L4 Surprised or not surprised based on comparison
Award 5m for supported answers
e.g. After reading Source C, I am not surprised by Source D because both
sources are similar in showing that the government may not cover the full
cost of developing a national athlete. In Source C, Joseph Schooling’s uncle
argued that most of Joseph Schooling’s expenses for his development were
not covered by the government. This can be seen from “His accommodation,
his specialist coaches, and his trips to various competitions were also paid
for by his parents”. In Source D, the SportSG has acknowledged that “while
the intent (of financial schemes/scholarships) is to contribute to the
additional costs of meeting the demands of international athlete, it is unlikely
to meet all costs involved and is not intended to do so”.
e.g. After reading Source C, I am surprised by Source D because while
Source D suggests that SportSG seems to offer quite a lot of support to high
performing athletes, Source C shows that Joseph Schooling, a high former
high performing athlete, did not receive much support from the government.
Hence, the sources seem to contradict each other. Source D shows that the
government came up with schemes like “spexScholarship” and
“spexPotential” which offer athletes financial support and allows them to train
full time. On the other hand, it seems that Joseph Schooling did not really
benefit from these schemes and that “Government funding only came in very
late” while his parents had to fork out the money to develop him in his
younger years.
4-5
L5 Both elements of L4
OR
Not surprised based on logical reasoning
Answers that lack clarity (either due to vague phrasing or lack of sources’
evidence) will be capped at L3.
e.g. After reading Source C, I am not surprised by Source D because Source
C highlights the huge amount of personal money Joseph Schooling’s
parents spent to develop him, it is no wonder that the government needs to
put a disclaimer that they would not be able to cover every cent that is
needed to develop an athlete. Source C shows that Max Le Blond
highlighted the effort of Joseph Schooling’s parents to fork out for “His
accommodation, his specialist coaches, and his trips to various
competitions”. The disclaimer in Source D is shown in “While the intent is to
contribute to the additional costs of meeting the demands of international
athlete, it is unlikely to meet all costs involved and is not intended to do so”.
6-7

-- 12 of 22 --

13
L6 Not surprised based on provenance of Source D
e.g. After reading Source C, I am not surprised by Source D. Since Max Le
Blond has criticised the government for not doing enough to support his
nephew who ended up being Singapore’s first Olympic gold medalist.
Source C was published in 2021 when Schooling had won the Olympic gold.
However, Source D was published in 2023. It could be that Sports
SG(Government) has noted the great financial costs involved in nurturing an
Olympic medalist and has reviewed the need to provided more support for
Singapore’s national athletes in achieving their sporting dreams. As shown
from 2023, enrolled Team SG athletes will get support such as “competition
funding”, “sports medicine services”. High potential athletes are offered
various schemes such as “spexScholarship” and “spexPotential” which allow
athletes to be paid while training full time. Furthermore, it provided a
disclaimer that “it is unlikely to meet all costs involved and is not intended to
do so”. MCCY published this to get citizens to appreciate that the
government is serious in its intention to nurture world class athletes.
7

-- 13 of 22 --

14
(4) Study Source E.
How useful is Source E as evidence about Singapore’s progress to achieve
sporting success? Explain your answer.
[7]
L1 Useful or less useful, based on undeveloped/invalid assertions on
provenance
e.g. Source E is useful because it is from the minister hence it must be true
about sports in Singapore.
1
L2 Less useful based on missing information
e.g. Source E is less useful as it does not show other important information
like the percentage of national athletes who have achieved a medal in major
games. [3]
e.g. Source E is less useful as source does not actually show the progress
such as the evaluation of achievements and setbacks. It only speaks of the
government’s plan moving forward. [3]
Useful based on content
Award 3m for supported answers
Source E is useful as it has evidence to show that Singapore in making good
progress in achieving sporting success. [2] Source E details that not only is
the government pumping “$70 million into the HPS”, and “working with other
sports stakeholders”, and bringing disability sports into the limelight. [3]
2-3
L3 Both elements of L2 4
L4 Useful based on cross-reference
Award 6m for both arguments.
Cap at L3/4 for answers without the use of reliability.
e.g. Source E is reliable hence useful in showing that Singapore is making
good progress in achieving sporting success because Source B supports it.
Source E shows that the government is pumping government pumping “$70
million into the HPS”, it is also “working with other sports stakeholders” and
bringing disability sports into the limelight. All these efforts aim to improve
Singapore’s sporting achievements and promote inclusivity. Likewise, Source
B shows that Singapore is making good progress in achieving sporting
success because the athletes who were nurtured by Singapore Sports School
when they were young have made it onto the world stage by qualifying for the
Olympics. Source B shows a collage of different athletes who are Sports
School’s students or alumni and celebrates them representing Singapore in
the Olympics.
Source E is not reliable hence less useful in showing that Singapore is making
good progress in achieving sporting success because Source F contradicts
it. Source E shows that the government is pumping government pumping “$70
million into the HPS”, it is also “working with other sports stakeholders” and
bringing disability sports into the limelight. All these efforts aim to improve
Singapore’s sporting achievements and promote inclusivity. However, Source
F shows that the government is going to convert a big piece of land meant for
sports now for residential development. That shows that the government does
not really prioritise sports which makes it quite difficult for Singapore to
achieve sporting success. Source F shows that “It would be devastating to
lose one of the remaining sports hubs and massive green spaces left in
Singapore which consists of (sports) facilities equivalent to at least 14 football
fields”.
5-6

-- 14 of 22 --

15
L5 Less useful based on provenance
Considering this is a standalone level, student’s response must be able to
capture the essence of why the source is not reliable and limited in
usefulness, beyond saying that the source is biased.
Source E is less useful to show that Singapore has been making good
progress to achieve sporting success. As the Minister for MCCY which
oversees sport in Singapore, Mr Edwin Tong would have to showcase the
government’s efforts in trying to promote and develop sports in Singapore.
The source shows that the government “invests about $70 million annually
into the High Performance Sport system for our national athletes”, works “with
sports stakeholders… to support and enhance sports in Singapore”, and
“stepped up support… for the disability sports ecosystem”. Considering that
there are critics who feels that sports is not prioritised in Singapore, and
there’s insufficient funding and infrastructure to support sports development
in Singapore, the minister has made this speech to convince the critics
otherwise so that they can be less skeptical and more appreciative of the
government’s stance and efforts. While the plans and efforts he mentioned
are real, the success of their implementation and the impact on citizens are
not captured and explored. As such, the source is not reliable and not useful
show that Singapore has been making good progress to achieve sporting
success.
7

-- 15 of 22 --

16
(5) “Singapore is heading in the right direction to achieve sporting success.”
Using sources in this case study, explain how far you would agree with this
statement. [10]
L1 Writes about statement, no valid source use
e.g. Sports is very important in Singapore and Singapore is moving in the right
direction as many people use the stadiums and pools in Singapore.
Furthermore, the government has pumped in money to develop sports so it’s
definitely moving in the right direction.
1
L2 Explain agree / disagree, supported.
Award 2 marks for explaining from one source
Award 3 marks for explaining from 2 sources
Award 4 marks for explaining from 3 sources
Agreement - B, D, E
Source B agrees with the statement.
Source B shows a photo collage showcasing some talented athletes and
alumni from Singapore Sports School who represented Singapore in Tokyo
2020. The header of the article “Sports School Alumni and Student-Athletes
Shine at Tokyo 2020!”
This suggests that Singapore is heading in the right direction to achieve
sporting success because the Singapore Sports School seems to be effective
in nurturing youth athletes to eventually represent the country in high profile
competitions such as Olympics.
Source D agrees with the statement.
Source D shows the extensive amount of support provided to national athletes
such as “competition funding”, “sports medicine services”, and various
schemes such as “spexScholarship” and “spexPotential” which allows
athletes to be paid while training full time.
This suggests that Singapore is heading in the right direction to achieve
sporting success because the government provides enough support to allow
athletes to train full time and focus on their sporting career, which will increase
the chances of them winning.
Source E agrees with the statement.
Source E shows “that not only is the government pumping “$70 million into the
HPS”, and “working with other sports stakeholders”, and bringing disability
sports into the limelight.
This suggests that Singapore is heading in the right direction to achieve
sporting success because the government is providing national athletes with
a lot of financial support to prepare well for competitions.
2-4

-- 16 of 22 --

17
Disagreement - A, C, F
Source A disagrees with the statement.
Source A shows a poster where the government is charging $30-50 per hour
for booking of futsal courts and comments that “How is restricting the
accessibility and development of grassroots soccer, especially amongst
youths, helpful to the attainment of Goal 2034?”
This suggests that Singapore is not heading in the right direction to achieve
sporting success because they are making sports facilities less accessible
which will discourage young people to participate and excel in sports.
Source C disagrees with the statement.
Source C shows that Joseph Schooling’s “His accommodation, his specialist
coaches, and his trips to various competitions were also paid for by his
parents.”
This suggests that Singapore is not heading in the right direction to achieve
sporting success because the government is not providing enough financial
support to develop high potential athletes. This means the government is not
aware of the great financial costs involved in nurturing world class athletes.
Source F disagrees with the statement.
Source F shows Source F shows that the government is going to convert a
big piece of land meant for sports for residential development. That will result
in many people to not be able to play sports such as rugby, cricket and football.
This suggests that Singapore is not heading in the right direction to achieve
sporting success because the government does not really prioritise sports
which makes it quite difficult for Singaporeans to access sports, play sports,
and eventually achieve sporting success.

-- 17 of 22 --

18
L3 Support and do not support the assertion, supported by valid source
use.
Both elements of L2.
Award 5m for the use of 1-1 source
Award 6m for the use of 1-2 sources
Award 7-8m for the use of 2-2 sources
5-8
To score additional 2m, candidates can take on any of these three routes:
Through analysing at least one source in relation to its reliability, utility or
sufficiency
e.g. Source E is however not reliable. As the Minister for MCCY which oversees
sport in Singapore, Mr Edwin Tong would have to showcase the government’s
efforts in trying to promote and develop sports in Singapore. The source shows that
the government “invests about $70 million annually into the High Performance Sport
system for our national athletes”, works “with sports stakeholders… to support and
enhance sports in Singapore”, and “stepped up support… for the disability sports
ecosystem”. Considering that there are critics who feels that sports is not prioritised
in Singapore, and there’s insufficient funding and infrastructure to support sports
development in Singapore, the minister has made this speech to convince the critics
otherwise so that they can be less skeptical and more appreciative of the
government’s stance and efforts. While the plans and efforts he mentioned are real,
the success of their implementation and the impact on citizens are not captured and
explored.
By sharing example(s) from their contextual knowledge
e.g. Furthermore, Joseph Schooling is not the only national athlete whose family has
to pay out of their pockets to develop their sports career. The Quah siblings (Jing
Wen, Ting Wen, Zheng Wen) are also three high profile swimmers who have won
many SEA Games gold medals and Asian Games medals over the years. All of them
spent 5 years or so abroad in overseas schools specialising in swimming to fully
develop their potential, with the help of their family’s support. This example seems
to highlight that it’s hard to succeed in sports unless one is wealthy to begin with.
Therefore, this shows that there is a need for the government to provide greater
financial support in order for more athletes to succeed, especially those who cannot
afford to pursue their athletic ambitions in other countries.
By giving a balanced conclusion / resolution (L3 +)

-- 18 of 22 --

19
(6) Extract 1 reflects that Singapore needs to do more to tackle racism.
What important messages would you share with Singaporeans to
promote racial harmony in Singapore? Explain your answer with
reference to two messages. [7]
Level Answer Marks
L1 Describes the topic.
i.e.
[1]
L2 Identifies/ describes message(s) using any one approach
Award 2 marks for identifying one message and 3 marks for identifying
two messages.
Award 3 marks for describing one message and 4 marks for describing
two messages.
Context / Description
e.g. One message is “we all have to play our part to uphold racial
harmony”. Racial harmony takes work in a sense that people need to
actively appreciate other cultures, and refrain from making racist remarks
that may hurt others. For example, one should avoid casual racism,
stereotyping others and discriminating people of another race.
Specific example based on Singapore
e.g. One message is “it is illegal to hurt the racial feelings of others”. In
Singapore, it is against the law if one has the deliberate intention of
wounding the racial feelings of others, religious feelings even. For
example, an ex-Ngee Ann Poly lecturer was charged and jailed for
openly telling an interracial couple that the Indian man should not be
dating the Chinese woman followed by some racist remarks.
Strategy
e.g. One message is “we all have to play our part to uphold racial
harmony”. That is why racial harmony is included in the school curriculum
from primary education to junior college education. Students are often
taught about the importance of respecting one another during CCE
lessons.
Outcome
e.g. One message is “we all have to play our part to uphold racial
harmony”. If people take racial harmony for granted and do not behave
in a respectful manner, there is a possibility that unhappiness and
tension may brew. In the worst case scenario, there could be a repeat of
the Maria Hertogh racial riot episode or serious hate crimes that can
shake the nation’s unity.
[2-4]
v L2 + Explains message(s) using any two strategies
Award 5-6 marks for explaining the significance of 1 message
Award 6-7 marks for explaining the significance of 2 message(s)
[5-7]

-- 19 of 22 --

20
e.g. One message is “we all have to play our part to uphold racial
harmony”. Racial harmony takes work in a sense that people need to
actively appreciate other cultures, and refrain from making racist remarks
that may hurt others. For example, one should avoid casual racism,
stereotyping others and discriminating people of another race.
[Description/context] If people take racial harmony for granted and do
not behave in a respectful manner, there is a possibility that unhappiness
and tension may brew. In the worst case scenario, there could be a
repeat of the Maria Hertogh racial riot episode or serious hate crimes that
can shake the nation’s unity. [Outcome]
e.g. One message is “it is illegal to hurt the racial feelings of others”. In
Singapore, it is against the law if one has the deliberate intention of
wounding the racial feelings of others, religious feelings even. For
example, an ex-Ngee Ann Poly lecturer was charged and jailed for
openly telling an interracial couple that the Indian man should not be
dating the Chinese woman followed by some racist remarks. [Specific
example] This message is important as many people know that racism
is bad and damaging, but they do not know that Singapore has made it
a law to highlight the seriousness of culturally offensive acts and
remarks. However, people should respect other races not simply to avoid
legal consequences, but they should respect other races by
understanding the spirit and rationale of the law. [Context]

-- 20 of 22 --

21
(7) Extracts 2 and 3 are about how religion and socio-economic status
contribute to a diverse society.
Do you think that religion is more significant than socio-economic status
in contributing to the diversity of Singapore? Explain your answer. [8]
Level Answer Marks
L1 Writes about topic but without addressing question.
Award 1 mark for describing the topic.
Award 2 marks for additional details.
e.g. Diversity is very important in Singapore. Singapore is a multi-racial
society whereby there are people of different religions and socio-
economic status. Many Singaporeans are proud that Singapore is a
peaceful multicultural society.
[1-2]
L2 Describes factor(s) contributing to diversity
Award 3 marks for describing one factor
Award 4 marks for describing both factors
e.g. Religions contribute to diversity in Singapore. There are many
religions practised in Singapore, some common ones are Buddhism,
Christianity, Islam, and Hinduism. With different religions, there are also
many places of worship. For example, churches for Christians,
Mosques for Muslims, and respective Temples for Buddhists, Taoists,
and Hindus.
e.g. Socio-economic status contributes to diversity in Singapore.
Depending on one’s level of wealth, it will influence individuals’ and
families’ lifestyle. For example, the high income or rich people may live
in Bungalows, condos and dine in at expensive restaurants. On the
other hand, the low income may live in rental flats, smaller public
housing flats and prefer affordable food choices like hawker food or
home cooked food.
[3-4]

-- 21 of 22 --

22
L3 Explains factor(s) contributing to diversity
Award 5-6 marks for explaining one factor
Award 6-7 marks for explaining both factors
e.g. Religions contribute to diversity in Singapore. There are many
religions practised in Singapore, some common ones are Buddhism,
Christianity, Islam, and Hinduism. With different religions, there are also
many places of worship built around the whole of Singapore including
the heartlands. For example, churches for Christians, Mosques for
Muslims, and respective Temples for Buddhists, Taoists, and Hindus.
Having different places of worship shapes the architecture and
urban landscape in Singapore. For example, the Sultan Mosque at
Bugis is the primary landmark of Kampong Glam as it is a vibrant
symbol of the Muslim faith and the Malay community. Since
different religious practices and traditions can be observed in the
heartlands, religious diversity is also made visible in
Singaporeans’ everyday lives.
e.g. Socio-economic status contributes to diversity in Singapore.
Depending on one’s level of wealth and occupation, it will influence
individuals’ and families’ lifestyle. For example, the high income or rich
people may live in Bungalows, terraces, condos and can afford to visit
private hospitals. On the other hand, the low income may live in rental
flats, smaller public housing flats and have to depend on public
healthcare. Generally, varying SES statuses are visible in the
society because of the different types and sizes of housing and
facilities that have been built across Singapore. SES diversity may
result in tension if there are sentiments in the society that the rich
are favoured over the poor, or if the rich look down on the poor.
[5-7]
L4 L3 + Evaluate importance of factors
Possible arguments:
● Which is celebrated more
● Which is more visible (perhaps in the eyes of tourists)
● Which one has resulted in more governmental policies
Religion is more significant in contributing to the diversity in Singapore
as religious diversity is celebrated more so than SES diversity. While
religious diversity can sometimes result in tensions, most Singaporeans
seem to be able to appreciate or tolerate diverse religious practices and
beliefs. Students even have learning journeys to appreciate and learn
more about landmarks such as Sultan Mosque, Sri Mariamman
Temple, and the Buddha Tooth Relic Temple. However, while SES
diversity contributes to the urban landscape in Singapore and provides
people with a huge variety of activities and facilities, it is very much a
sensitive topic that is largely addressed and managed through
government policies in healthcare in housing.
8

-- 22 of 22 --