Name: ______________________________ ( ) Class: _______
Secondary 4 Express / 5 Normal (Academic)
HUMANITIES 2260/01
2261/01
Paper 1 Social Studies 16 August 2023 (Fri)
10.20 am 1 hour 45 minutes
READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST
Write in dark blue or black pen.
Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.
At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together.
Section A
Answer all questions.
Section B
Answer both questions.
The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question.
This document consists of 7 printed pages and 1 blank page.
Setter: Ms Jamie Low
MONTFORT SECONDARY SCHOOL
PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION 2024

-- 1 of 9 --

2
4E5N Prelim 2024
Section A (Source-Based Case Study)
Answer all questions.
Exploring Citizenship and Governance
Study the Background Information and the sources carefully, and then answer all the
questions.
You may use any of the sources to help you answer the questions, in addition to those
sources which you are told to use. In answering the questions, you should use your
knowledge of the issue to help you interpret and evaluate the sources.
1 Study Source A.
What is the attitude of women towards the Baby Bonus scheme? Explain
your answer using details from the source. [5]
2 Study Sources B and C.
How similar are Sources B and C? Explain your answer. [7]
3 Study Sources D and E.
Does Source D surprise you about what Source E said about
Singaporeans’ attitudes towards having children? Explain your answer.
[7]
4 Study Source F.
Does this source prove that it is impossible to improve birth rates? Explain
your answer.
[6]
5 ‘Financial incentives are the best way to manage declining birth rates.’
Using sources in this case study, explain how far you would agree with this
statement. [10]

-- 2 of 9 --

3
4E5N Prelim 2024 [Turn over
How challenging is it to manage declining birth rates?
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Read this carefully. It may help you to answer some of the questions.
Birth rates have decreased worldwide. Factors contributing to this problem include
economic uncertainties, changing views towards marriage and parenthood, delayed
marriages, career aspirations and work-life balance. A reduced birth rate can cause
serious problems in society such as an ageing population, which can severely strain
social services such as the healthcare system. Declining birth rates also means there will
be labour shortages which can harm businesses and the economy. With a shrinking tax-
paying population, it also means the government will have difficulties collecting tax
revenue to take care of the country.
Governments around the world have been trying to encourage their citizens to give birth
more. Measures include providing financial incentives to parents of young children,
implementing family-friendly policies at workplaces that allow working parents to spend
time with their children, encouraging fathers to play a more active role as care-givers and
changing citizens’ mindsets about the importance of marriage and family.
Study the following sources to find out how challenging it is to manage declining birth
rates.
Source A: From an article on the Baby Bonus Scheme, published on Channel
NewsAsia website, 2023. The Baby Bonus scheme was implemented by
the government to encourage young parents to have more children.
Parents will receive a cash gift between $8000 to $12000 upon the birth of
the child. If parents deposit money into their child’s Child Development
Account (CDA), the government will also match their deposits dollar-by-
dollar, up to $18000.
Some women were happy with the additional financial support. School fees at a
government-supported childcare center would typically cost $500 a month while a
private one can exceed S$1,000. Thus, many young parents have put aside money in
their child’s Child Development Account (CDA) to take advantage of the government's
matching of savings.
However, some mothers feel that the Baby Bonus is generous but useless. While they
will be getting free cash, it is not what working mothers need the most. Many working
mothers work 10-hour days but still have to cope with the demands of child-rearing
once they reach home. The lack of workplace support in the form of flexible hours or
the chance to work from home have turned them away from child-birth. Women would
also like to see their husbands playing a more supportive role as well. Traditional
mindsets about parenting roles need to change to encourage more women to give birth.

-- 3 of 9 --

4
4E5N Prelim 2024
Source B: A cartoon on managing birth rates in Singapore, published in The
Straits Times, July 2015.
Source C: From a report on how different countries attempted to raise birth rates,
published on British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) website, May 2021.
Over nine years, the small Japanese town of Nagi-cho managed to double its birth rate
from 1.4 to 2.8 children per woman with an extensive scheme of family friendly policies.
Families get baby bonuses and children allowances.
In Korea, researchers at the University of Seoul found that fertility rates increased when
men helped out more at home. She studied families with one child and found that when
men did one more hour a week of housework at home, it was related to a significant
increase in the chances that that family would have a second child.
Sweden’s fertility rates also increased in the 2000s. Mothers and fathers are offered
generous leave after having a baby. Fathers take as much as 30% of the number of
days of parental leave that mothers do. They are heavily involved and take the main
responsibility for the child for the first year and a half of their child’s life.

-- 4 of 9 --

5
4E5N Prelim 2024 [Turn over
Source D: Comments made by a Singaporean published on The Straits Times
Forum, Dec 2020.
Some women would quit their jobs to take care of their children but others would not.
When making decisions on whether to have children, it all boils down to attitude towards
one’s career and personal choice.
Family-oriented women are more likely than career-oriented women to be encouraged
by paid maternity leave and monetary incentives to have more children as it allows
them to spend time with their newborns without losing their income. For career-oriented
women, one-time financial incentives will not entice them to make the leap into
motherhood. What they want is time to build their career and not have their career
advancements stalled due to the demands of being a working parent.
Society’s mindset about what makes for a fulfilling life has changed. If we want birth
rates to increase, we must take into account the concerns of different women. There is
no one-size fits all solution.
Source E: Speech by Mr Alex Yam, Member of Parliament (MP) for Marsiling-Yew
Tee GRC, April 2016.
Since 2001, we have committed billions of dollars into the Baby Bonus Scheme. If
there’s one thing we’ve learnt, money isn’t the motivating factor. In fact, I am
uncomfortable even with the term Baby Bonus. The baby itself is the bonus, a bonus
from a happy marriage that forms the basis for joy and hope in family life. The monetary
bonuses help but can never be the motivation for having children.
In the past, it was natural for young people to get married, buy a house, have children.
It was a rite of passage and just what was expected. Today, many young couples
choose not to have children. They prioritise having time for themselves and simply do
not desire the responsibility of being a parent. We need to realign our focus on the
family as the main strength of the nation. Children complete us, not conflict us.

-- 5 of 9 --

6
4E5N Prelim 2024
Source F: From a survey conducted by Institute of Policy Studies, a research think-
tank in Singapore, Jan 2024.
70% of young people aged 21 to 34 polled think it is not necessary to get married or
have children in a marriage but they do foresee themselves getting married, and hope
to have children eventually. They are held back by practical concerns such as wanting
to first advance their careers and build a comfortable life, as well as the cost and stress
of raising children.
The top two reasons for not dating or getting married are that they have not met the
right person yet, and that they prefer to remain single. Younger respondents are also
more likely to cite having other priorities in life other than marriage, such as their job
and self-discovery. Others commented the lack of time and energy from work as their
reasons for not dating.

-- 6 of 9 --

7
4E5N Prelim 2024 [Turn over
SECTION B (Structured-Response Questions)
Answer both questions.
Being Part of a Globalised World
Study the extracts carefully, and then answer the questions.
Extract 1
Self-radicalisation continues to be a threat to Singapore’s national security. Since 2015, 52
self-radicalised individuals – 40 Singaporeans and 12 foreigners – have been issued with
orders under the Internal Security Act (ISA). Among them are 13 Singaporean youths aged
20 or younger.
Extract 2
To effectively deal with transnational terrorism, governments must carry out security
measures within their country such as implementing border-management resources
and passing laws.
Extract 3
Due to the transnational nature of terrorism, it is very important for countries in the world
to collaboratively work together. Some of the collaborative efforts between countries
include participating in various missions across the world, the creation of United Nation
(UN) security resolution and Interpol Fusion Task Force.
6 Extract 1 states that self-radicalisation continues to be a threat to Singapore’s
national security.
In your opinion, what are the consequences of increasing self-
radicalisation on Singapore? [7]
7 Extract 2 and 3 reflect on the security measures by governments and international
cooperation in countering terrorism.
Do you think that security measures by governments is more effective than
international cooperation in countering terrorism? Explain your answer. [8]

-- 7 of 9 --

BLANK PAGE
Copyright Acknowledgements:
Source A: © adapted from Loyang View Secondary School 2023 Prelim
Source B: © adapted from Hougang Secondary School 2022 Prelim
Source C: © adapted from Assumption English School 2023 Prelim
Source D: © adapted from Bukit Merah Secondary School 2016 Prelim
Source E: © adapted from Bukit Merah Secondary School 2016 Prelim
Source F: © https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/most-young-singaporeans-feel-it-is-not-necessary-to-marry-but-almost-
7-in-10-want-to
Extract 1: ©https://www.channelnewsasia.com/singapore/terrorism-threat-elevated-renewed-israel-palestine-conflict-
singapore-also-affected-isd-4503686

-- 8 of 9 --

9
4E5N Prelim 2024 [Turn over

-- 9 of 9 --