VICTORIA SCHOOL
SECONDARY 3 SOCIAL STUDIES 2020
SA2 SUGGESTED ANSWERS
1) Study Source A.
What is the message of this cartoon? Explain your answer. [6]
L1 Misconception / Description [1]
L2 General Statements not about recycling
Singaporeans are selfish
Education has failed
[2]
L3 Sub-messages / Tone toward parents
Parents are to be blamed for poor recycling rates / Parents are not supporting
their children / Parents should support their children in recycling
Mocking parents / Critical toward parents
[3]
L4 Message
The message is that recycling is seen as negative / undesirable act by many
adult Singaporeans. (Behaviour of Singaporeans toward recycling)
OR [4]
AND [5]
This is because many feel that it is not their responsibility and it should be
the responsibility of those who earn/are paid to do these jobs such as the
Karang Guni men. (reasons for their behaviour – mainly relating to
responsibility)
[4-5]
L5 Message with broader outcome
The message of this cartoon is to create a sense of shared responsibility
among Singaporeans toward recycling (source was created in 2010). In the
past since recycling was perceived to be undesirable act, it was necessary for
actions to be taken to have a change of mindset among Singaporeans and
work together for the good of society – protecting the environment.
[6]

-- 1 of 13 --

2) Study Sources B and C.
Does the resident in Source C think that the project in Source B will
work? Explain your answer. [7]
L1 Will work based on Provenance / Mismatch [1-2]
L2 No clear basis of Comparison [3]
L3 Will work OR Will NOT work based on Content with clear basis of
comparison
Well explained answers will get 5 marks
Will work – as the new bin educates residents of how to recycle
Source B – “we aim to increase public awareness about the process of
recycling right and reduce contamination”…“Notices are also to be placed at
a person’s eye-level…visualise what is allowed to be recycled with minimal
effort”
Source C – “…many are still not very educated about how to recycle
properly…”
Will not work – convenience
Source B – “We hope to create a transparent bin which may make people
more conscious of what they are placing into the bin…”
Source C – “Do you really think that Singaporeans in general will take the time
out to do that when they don’t even take the time to do simple things?”
Will not work as most Singaporeans may still throw things that do not
belong to the recycling bin even if the bin is transparent as the process of
recycling right is too tedious and time consuming.
[4-5]
L4 Will work AND Will NOT work based on content [6]
L5 Will not work based on Perspective (need to be clearly explained)
The resident would not think that the project will work as she feels
cynical/negative that Singaporeans will change their mindset and put in the
time to recycle properly. Source B’s project may not address the root cause
which is Singaporean’s behaviour as it is only dealing with the bin’s
structure.
[7]

-- 2 of 13 --

(Note: Explanation must be clear and detailed. Do not accept
‘pessimism’ if explanation does not relate directly to the mindset
of Singaporeans.)
3) Study Sources D. [7]

-- 3 of 13 --

Why do you think this source was published? Explain your answer.
L1 Literal description / Misconception
This source was posted to show that there is a lot of wastage involved in
delivery packages.
[1]
L2 Context
This source was posted in the context of rising e-commerce and the Earth
Day.
[2]
L3 Message
This source was posted to show that more can be done to reduce excessive
wastage resulting from e-commerce and packaging.
This source was posted to raise awareness among Singaporeans regarding
the excessive wastage resulting from e-commerce and packaging.
This source was posted to educate Singaporeans regarding excessive
wastage resulting from e-commerce and packaging.
[3]
L4 General Purpose with Outcome
This source was posted to educate Singaporeans regarding excessive
wastage resulting from e-commerce and packaging so that…
…Singaporeans will reduce their e-commerce purchases.
…Singaporeans will go to local shops/physical shops to purchase their
products.
[4]
L5 L4 + Context
Context can be L2 or higher context (in L7)
[5]
L6 Specific Purpose with Outcome
This source was posted to educate Singaporeans regarding the excessive
wastage resulting from online shopping and packaging. This is so that
Singaporeans will support the fight against excessive wastage generated
by the e-commerce packaging by posting this wastage on social media and
exercising responsible buying. This will also allow Singaporeans to stop
buying from companies that create such wasteful packaging.
This source was posted to educate Singaporeans regarding the excessive
wastage resulting from online shopping and packaging. This is so that
Singaporeans will support the fight against excessive wastage generated by
the e-commerce packaging by highlighting this wastage on social media. This
[6]

-- 4 of 13 --

will also motivate companies engaging in e-commerce to change their
packaging methods so that the overall waste production can be reduced.
L7 L6/6 + Context about larger issue
Government is concerned about the fact that the nation’s only landfill is
expected to only last till 2035 and along with the zero-waste campaign in
2019 this source was also published.
[7]
4) Study Source E.
How useful is this source as evidence about Singaporeans’ attitude
towards recycling? Explain your answer. [7]
L1 Useful – Common sense
Useful because the resident is actually going through these problems.
[1]
L2 Not Useful – Typicality
Not useful as it is only the experience of a single resident in Singapore. Others
might actually be finding it easy to recycle.
[2]
L3 Useful (Sub-message – not addressing Singaporeans’ attitude)
This source is useful as it shows that domestic recycling is difficult /
frustrating / confusing.
OR
Not Useful
[3]

-- 5 of 13 --

Because this source only shows the lack of action by the government. / Source
doesn’t tell you about Singaporean’s negligence and only tells you about the
government’s lack of actions.
(Note: There is no cross-reference to this level.)
L4 Useful (Main message – addressing Singaporeans’ attitude)
Useful –
This source is useful as it shows that Singaporeans are frustrated toward
recycling in Singapore as the way it is carried out by the government is not
helping them despite the blame being put on them.
This source is useful as it shows that Singaporeans have a positive attitude
toward recycling but they are frustrated at the lack of help provided by the
government.
[4]
L5 Useful (Cross-reference) to attitude
Cross-reference to Source C – positive attitude of people toward
recycling: people do put in the effort of separating the recyclables –
“Before bringing my recyclables down to the blue bins, I always take the time
to clean or wash the items that accumulate in my recycling corner”
(Note: Do not accept direct cross-reference to C to prove E unreliable.
Do not accept cross-reference A, as A is based the opinion of a
cartoonist.)
[5]
L6 Not Useful (Cross-reference Typicality) – reference to Singaporean’s
attitude
Cross-reference to Source C & BI: most people in Singapore are lacklustre
about recycling and do not bother to do it properly. Hence Source E might
be the experience of a single resident.
Source C: “Do you really think Singaporeans in general will take the time out
to do that when they don’t even take the time to do simple things?”
BI: “The National Environment Agency (NEA) revealed that although the
amount of waste generated decreased, recycling rates also decreased in
Singapore.”
[6]
L7 Not Useful (Over-exaggeration + Pushing of blame)
Source E is over-exaggerating the situation to shift the blame from
residents to the government for the lack of recycling. He uses rhetoric
questioning and overexaggerates the positive actions taken by
Singaporeans and the lack of actions taken by the government to
[7]

-- 6 of 13 --

convince others that the government needs to do more to solve the problem
of low recycling rates. Hence it is not reliable and not useful as evidence
about Singaporean’s attitude towards recycling.
“Don’t just put a big blue bin and expect everyone to know what to do.”
“we always categorise the items by putting them into different bags but in the
end we can only dump everything into the big blue bin.”
“Or in the end do all the things that we put into the big blue bin just get
thrown away?”
“You can’t blame the public for the mix-ups of recyclables and trash when the
bins are not helpful.
(Note: Do not accept students that simply claim that the source is
biased – no reason for source to have a balanced view in this scenario.
If they can relate to the purpose of shifting the blame to the
government then the answer can be excepted.
Do not accept answers that do not provide evidence to show over-
exaggeration in the source.)

-- 7 of 13 --



-- 8 of 13 --

5)
Study Source F.
How far does this source prove that Singaporeans are becoming more
interested in recycling? Explain your answer. [7]
L1 Provenance
Yes it does prove as it is from NEA.
[1]
L2 Typicality (Does not Prove)
This source does not prove as it just only shows a few vending machines which
are being used by Singaporeans.
[2]
L3 Does prove (Content)
Yes it does prove as there are a lot of Singaporeans who are taking part in this
recycling process.
[3]
L4 Does Prove (Cross-reference to Source C)
Yes it does prove as Source C shows that Singaporeans are becoming
interested in recycling. Source C shows the efforts undertaken by the resident
to ensure that recycling is done properly.
Does not Prove (Cross-reference to BI)
No it does not prove as when cross-referenced to BI, it shows that
Singaporeans are still not interested in recycling. This can be seen from the
decrease in recycling rates in 2019. (Note: The cross-reference for this
does not link directly to the sequence of events but just merely on the
idea of ‘interested’ VS ‘not interested’.)
[4]
L5 Does not Prove (Content elaborated) – in relation to the launch [5]
No, it does not prove as the number of people there at the reverse vending
machines may just be because of the launch itself. There is no evidence of
continued recycling from Singaporeans after the launch. People may just be
attending the launch as it is new.
Does not Prove / Does Prove (Content Elaborated) – in relation to money
[5]
It does not prove as NEA is trying to use monetary rewards to increase
recycling rates. Hence Singaporeans may not be actually interested in
recycling but rather in the value of the vouchers given by the machine.
It does prove as the usage of monetary rewards for recycling will increase the
number of people who are becoming interested in recycling.
Does not Prove (Content Inferred) [6]
It does not prove as the reason the event is conducted and the photograph
is posted shows that there are many Singaporeans who are still not interested
[5-6]

-- 9 of 13 --

in recycling yet. Hence such an event must be organised to get them to be
interested in recycling.
L6 Does Not Prove (Purpose)
There is a purpose to this source. NEA’s agenda is to promote recycling and
a zero-waste nation so they would advertise the presence and immediate
success of the ‘reverse’ vending machine so that more Singaporeans will
start recycling using this vending machine in the future. But this however
doesn’t guarantee that many other Singaporeans will take part in
recycling using this machine. The source is trying to get more Singaporeans
to take part in recycling so that recycling rates in Singapore can increase.
Hence it does not prove that Singaporeans are becoming more interested in
recycling.
[7]
L7 Cross-reference to Background Information
It does not prove as the reason the event is conducted and the photograph
is posted shows that there are many Singaporeans who are still not interested
in recycling yet. Hence such an event must be organised to get them to be
interested in recycling. We can see from the Background Information that
recycling rates decreased at the end of 2019 which shows that there is a
clear lack of interest in Singaporeans towards recycling and thus the need
for such an event.
OR
No it does not prove, as cross-referenced to the Background Information. At
the end of 2019 it was revealed that recycling rates actually decreased.
Hence this photograph cannot prove that Singaporeans are becoming more
interested in recycling. Instead the machines failed in encouraging an
increase in recycling rates as they were introduced earlier in the year and
yet did not cause a change in Singaporeans’ interest toward recycling.
(Note: For the second cross-reference there must be clear relation to the
time line of Source F and the BI)
[8]

-- 10 of 13 --

6) Extract 1 talks about the increase in the number of foreign domestic
workers.
In your opinion, give two reasons why there is an increase in the number
of foreign domestic maids? Explain your answer. [7]
L1 Describes the topic i.e what foreign domestic maids do [1]
L2 Identifies/ Describes
Award 2 marks for identifying 1 reason and 3 marks for identifying 2 reasons
Award 3 marks for describing 1 reason and 4 marks for describing 2 reason
[2-4]
L3 L2 + Explains reasons
Award 5-6 marks for explaining one reason
Award 6-7 marks for explaining two reason
1) Situation / Circumstance
2) What FDWs can do for Singaporeans
3) Benefit of having FDW
1 OR 2 – L2/3
1 AND 2 / 3 – L3/5
1, 2 AND 3 – L3/6
One reason would be the ageing population in Singapore. There are
more elderly in Singapore and a decreasing birth rate. There is a
worsening gini-coefficient gap. With more old people, they tend to fall
sick, are unable to take care of themselves and are possibly immobile,
requiring families who are unable to be full time caretakers to hire
foreign domestic maids to take care of the elderly in the house, such as
administering medicine, feeding them, helping them get around and
cooking and cleaning for them. Families
Another reason could be the Singapore’s prospering economy. With
Singapore’s small manpower and the government subsidising
education, both females and males have the same opportunities at
education and work. We are also the 4th richest nation in terms of GDP
in 2017. With both parents working and the government constantly
diversifying and expanding our economy with developing the bio-
science industry and the Integrated resorts, creating jobs for
Singaporeans, many families do not have the time to take care of their
children and elderly in Singapore but have the income to hire domestic
help to take care of the children, bring them to school and deal with the
cooking and cleaning in the house. Hence, with their enhanced
[5-7]

-- 11 of 13 --

economic ability and the government allowing for the hiring of foreign
domestic maid, these families would have the means and ability to hire
domestic maids, allowing them to focus on their career and Singapore’s
economy to continue to prosper, hence leading to an increase in
domestic maids in Singapore.
Do not accept answers that refer the perspective of FDWs. ONLY
answer accepted for this would be ‘employment opportunities’ as
it directly relates to the ‘need’ stated in Extract 1.
7) Extract 2 and Extract 3 show the effects of diversity in Singapore.
Do you think that different socio-economic status is a greater challenge
than different religions in a diverse society like Singapore? [8]
L1 Writes about the topic without addressing the question [1-2]
L2 Describes
Award 3m for describing one factor.
Award 4m for describing two factors.
[3-4]
L3 Explains
Award 5-6m for explaining one factor.
Award 6-7m for explaining two factors.
Diversity in Singapore is a consequence of different social economic status.
Socio-economic status refers to an economic situation shared by a group of
people and some determinants are occupation, income, education and
ownership of wealth. The socio-economic status of an individual may shape
one’s life experience as it affects the choice of housing, food, entertainment
and activities. This in turn can influence the circle of friends that one interacts
with. In this way, one’s identity can be shaped by one’s socio-economic status.
For example, activities such as polo and golf, fine dining and travelling to
distant destinations for vacations are usually activities carried out by people
with higher socio-economic status. Activities such as swimming, soccer and
basketball are enjoyed by individuals across all socio-economic groups as
street soccer and basketball courts are easily accessible to the public. With
different socio-economic status, it can result in an increasing income gap
between the higher and lower socio-economic groups over time which will
result in different life experiences within society, contributing to social tension,
especially when the lower SES feel like they have not been given enough
opportunities at social mobility. This may cause them to blame the
[5-7]

-- 12 of 13 --

government for not doing enough to help them, hence, causing challenges in
a diverse society like Singapore with different SES groups.
Diversity in Singapore is a consequence of difference in religions. A religion is
an organised collection of attitudes, beliefs. Practices, world views and often,
worship of a single or multiple gods. The religion that individuals believe in
may be determined by birth or by choice. Most religions embody a set of
shared core beliefs and practices. Believers keep to these beliefs and
practices regardless of their nationality and ethnicity. There are currently 10
major religions such as Buddhism, Islam, Christianity, Hinduism etc practiced
in Singapore as of 2015. Religious beliefs and practices shape the way we
interact with others, the choices we make and our thinking. With different
religions in Singapore shaping different beliefs and identities amongst
Singaporeans. Different beliefs may clash and resulting in religious conflict,
prejudice and misconception, discrimination which may lead to violence,
hence causing challenges in a diverse society like Singapore with different
religious groups.
L4 L3 plus explains the relative importance of each factor
In conclusion, religious diversity can be a bigger threat because people can
react very strongly with regards to their religious beliefs, making it easy to
trigger religious tension in a multi-racial and multi-religious society in
Singapore. Whereas different socio-economic status still share many common
activities together and the government has been active in promoting social
mobility in Singapore.
[8]

-- 13 of 13 --